 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
 
 
  
France strongly supported the United Nations’ adoption in September 2015 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which sets 17 Sustainable Development Goals for the world to eradicate extreme poverty, combat inequalities and protect the planet. 
This first universal approach provides a new framework for development policies for the next 15 years. It builds on the eight Millennium Development Goals implemented since 2000, which have contributed to real progress with tackling hunger, poverty and child mortality, rolling back pandemics, and improving access to water and education. 
Unlike the Millennium Development Goals, the new Sustainable Development Goals have a universal dimension and apply to all development challenges in all countries. In addition to the poverty reduction goals, the agenda features new goals to which France is equally attached with respect to environmental protection, gender equality, universal medical coverage, tackling illicit financial flows and corruption, and good governance. 
Given our long-standing, unremitting commitment to sustainable development, France has volunteered to present its 2030 Agenda implementation approach at the very first high-level political forum held since the adoption of this agenda. 
This report draws on consultations with civil society to present a first review of the implementation of each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals in France, identifying the main issues and challenges, government courses of action, and good practices and model measures already in place in a spirit of experience sharing. 
 
 
1) IMPLEMENTING THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS IN FRANCE: ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES 

 
• France has achieved a high standard of living and quality of life driven by inclusive social security systems (unemployment benefits, supplementary benefits and redistributive policy) and access for all to healthcare and basic goods and services (water, energy, quality food and education). The country has also developed state-ofthe-art public and private infrastructures (innovation and research, transport, communications, and cultural heritage). 
• Yet there is still work to be done, especially to reduce social, educational and gender inequalities, maintain healthy ecosystems and sustainably manage natural resources.In a climate of low growth and despite a downturn in recent months, unemployment remains persistently too high, especially among young people.  
 FRANCE IMPLEMENTS THE PARIS CLIMATE AGREEMENT AND PROMOTES SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT. 
• On 17 August 2015, well before COP21, the Energy Transition for Green Growth Act gave legislative shape to France’s voluntary commitment to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 40% below 1990 levels by 2030. 
• The act sets targets to increase the share of renewable energy sources to over 30% of final energy consumption in 2030 and bring down the share of nuclear power in electricity generation to 50% by 2025. 
• The Government led Parliament to pass a “climate energy contribution” on greenhouse gas emissions built into the taxes on petroleum products on a pathway, already adopted by Parliament, set to rise from €56 per tonne of CO2 in 2020 to €100 per tonne of CO2 in 2030. It will propose that Parliament introduce a price floor on carbon of some €30 per tonne in the power generation sector in 2017. 
• In June 2016, France was one of the first industrialised countries to complete its domestic process to ratify the Paris Agreement and is working with its European partners for the EU in its entirety to ratify it as soon as possible. As a contribution to rapidly increase collective ambition, France committed to upgrade its mitigation target by 2020. 
 FRANCE, A LAND OF POSITIVE ENERGY FOR GREEN GROWTH 
• In 2013, the French Government launched the New Face of Industry in France initiative to position French businesses on new economic growth markets. The projects backed by the initiative mainstream environmental goals. 
• Two industrial solutions focus more especially on the energy transition: New Resources and Sustainable Cities. The Government’s Industry of the Future programme designed to modernise the French productive machine based on the use of digital technologies also includes a goal to improve the energy efficiency of industrial processes. 
• As test grounds for the ecological transition, local authorities are encouraged to put in place solutions to develop energy-smart housing retrofits and efficient public transport networks funded by the Energy Transition Fund (with a three-year budget of €350 million), to promote a low-carbon footprint and green urban areas, and to tackle social-spatial segregation. Rural areas are also part of this environmental approach, with the promotion of agroecology to produce an adequate quantity of healthy food. 
• France, as one of the ten countries with the largest number of endangered species, due mainly to pressures overseas and in the Mediterranean, has taken measures to protect its marine and land ecosystems against artificial land cover, overexploitation of resources, climate change and pollution. 
• The French bill for the restoration of biodiversity, nature and landscapes, which is currently being debated, thus provides for the ratification of the Nagoya Protocol, the acknowledgement of the notion of ecological prejudice, the establishment of action plans for all threatened species in France, the enhancement of protection of marine biodiversity, the prohibition of neonicotinoids, and the exchange of traditional seed. 
 THE GOVERNMENT IS WORKING FOR EMPLOYMENT. 
• In December 2015, France’s unemployment rate stood at 10.2%, just below average for the eurozone (10.4%). However, the country posted 25.9% under-25 jobseekers compared with 19.7% for the eurozone. 
• Three years ago, France introduced a plan to tackle unemployment based on three priorities. 
o The first priority is to reduce social security charges, mainly with the emergency plan for employment, which should see one million people hired in 2016. 
o The second priority is to improve vocational training with the reform of the national vocational training system and measures taken in 2016 to double the number of training courses for jobseekers. The aim is to train a total of one million people or 20% of all jobseekers. 
o Lastly, although an average 600,000 employees will retire each year through to 2020, a total of 700,000 young people per year will enter the labour market at the same time. The Act of 1 March 2013 hence introduced the Intergenerational Contract to foster youth employment. This scheme hires young people on open-ended contracts, retains older workers and smooths the transfer of vocational skills. In September 2015, over 100,000 young and older workers were on an Intergenerational Contract. 
• Although this ambitious policy is starting to pay off, the number of young people entering the labour market every year calls for an offensive employment policy combined with a revised industrial policy.  
 
 
A HIGH-QUALITY SOCIAL SOLIDARITY SYSTEM WHOSE FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY NEEDS TO BE PROTECTED. 
• In the last 70 years, France has developed a social security system that protects people living in France from social risks (illness, accidents and family welfare) and pays them a pension in retirement. 
• Any person residing legally in France is also guaranteed a minimum income and essential services (education, housing benefit, power supply, culture, etc.) as social inclusion and poverty exit mechanisms. These take the form of welfare, supplementary benefits and free public services. 
• France also promotes access to culture and national heritage for all population groups, in particular with programmes for young people from disadvantaged areas. 
• These measures are provided mainly by central or local government, but civil society also makes a significant contribution. Associations and many businesses play an important solidarity role, with free meals as well as literacy, social reintegration and back-to-work actions. 
• France also redistributes wealth across the nation. Former industrial areas, for example, receive funds to finance their redevelopment. 
• This solidarity system driven by social and intergenerational solidarity relies on continued efforts to restore the balance of the social security accounts for it to maintain the same, if not higher, level of quality. 
 WORK REMAINS TO BE DONE TO REDUCE SOCIAL INEQUALITIES. 
• In France today, one in seven households lives below the poverty line (income of less than €960 per month) and one in five children is highly vulnerable. A total of 22% of the people below the poverty line live in a situation of food insecurity. 
• With 78.3% of baccalauréat holders in one generation in 2015, France has virtually achieved its target 80% baccalauréat pass rate. Nevertheless, the weight of social class in academic achievement remains high and an estimated 20% of pupils have academic difficulties. 
• In terms of remuneration, men still earn 23.5% more on average than women for the same number of working hours, especially in executive positions. 
• As the bedrock for social unity and cohesion, tackling inequalities calls for new social mobility drivers. The French Government is totally committed to this and a particular effort is being made in the most disadvantaged areas, from neighbourhood to regional level, to identify the main factors of inequality and reduce them by means of education and training in particular. 
• Social inequalities go hand in hand with environmental inequalities. So the public policies in France are also designed to reduce exposure to risks and hazards (pollution, natural disasters, etc.), tackle fuel poverty and facilitate access to nature for all.  
 
 
ACTIONS TO IMPROVE FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS AND PARTICIPATORY DEMOCRACY 
• France is a well-established democracy based on a robust political and legal system, which offers sound guarantees to French citizens and foreign nationals to effectively assert their rights. Human rights and equality of all citizens before the law, without distinction of gender, race or religion are written into the French Constitution and their respect guaranteed by the courts. 
• This framework has been improved in recent years with the introduction of independent administrative authorities, scaled-up court supervision, especially when public and individual freedoms are in issue, and legislative measures such as legalising same-sex marriage. 
• France has also taken new measures to improve the transparency of political life, streamline administrative formalities and deepen our democratic tools, based especially on the use of digital means (public consultations, consensus conferences and local referendums). Every year, the “environmental conference” thus mobilizes the whole government to find responses to the demands of civil society representatives including local governments, unions, businesses and NGOs. 
 
2) 	AN 	INTERNATIONAL 	DEVELOPMENT 	POLICY 	FOR 	SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 

 
 FRANCE, FIFTH LARGEST GLOBAL DONOR, COMMITS TO INCREASE ITS INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY EFFORT 
• From 2013 to 2015, French bilateral aid helped put 2.6 million children in primary and middle school, gave 3.8 million people access to a sustainable source of clean drinking water and supported the development of 150,000 small businesses. 
• France has renewed its pledge to scale up its official development assistance, which stood at €8.3 billion or 0.37% of gross national income in 2015, 22% of which went to the least developed countries. 
• The target is to reach the collective European Union goal of official development assistance standing at 0.7% of gross national income by 2030, with a special effort made for the least developed countries (short-term target of 0.15% to 0.2% of gross national income). 
• To this end, France has undertaken to earmark an additional €4 billion per year to fund development by 2020, including €2 billion for climate change action, bringing the French Agency for Development’s volume of financial assistance to over €12.5 billion per year. Accordingly, it will increase the volume of funds allocated to climate change adaptation to €1 billion per year in 2020. Lastly, France will allocate nearly €400 million more in grants by 2020 compared with their current level. 
 
 
FRANCE IS A GLOBAL ADVOCATE OF SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT. 
• In July 2014, the Pluriannual Development and International Solidarity Policy Act was passed upstream of the 2030 Agenda. It focuses on the different dimensions of sustainable development (economic growth, poverty eradication and protecting the planet), stresses the need for an integrated approach and onboards nongovernmental players in the definition of action priorities. 
• In 2013, France set the French Agency for Development the ambitious target of supporting at least 50% of projects with a climate co-benefit, a target that it has already achieved. 
• France proposed a reform of global environmental governance, which has seen the scaling up of the United Nations Environment Programme. In the scientific field, France made a strong commitment to set up the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES).  
• Likewise, France worked closely on the negotiations for the new 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and actively promoted a number of objectives high on its list of development policy priorities: environmental and climate sustainability, gender equality (especially sexual and reproductive health and rights), universal health coverage, transparency, with a governance and rule of law objective, and sustainable cities. 
• France hosted and chaired COP21, which drove the first universal   agreement on climate that calls for respect for human rights and recognizing the specific role of women, and has since then it called for rapid ratification by all the parties. 
• With Peru, and then Morocco, and the United Nations, France encouraged  all civil society players to be rallied to this cause under the “Lima-Paris Action Agenda”, which today united 10,000 players from over 180 countries working in 70 international and multi-partner coalitions. 
• Lastly, it also actively defends the principle of carbon pricing at European and international level. 
 
 FRANCE TAKES AN INNOVATIVE APPROACH TO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT TOOLS AND FINANCING 
• In 2004, France took the initiative, with Brazil and Chile, to propose putting in place international solidarity taxes on activities that benefit the most from globalisation to provide innovative development financing in addition to budget resources. It introduced these taxes on airline tickets and financial transactions, providing funding to tackle the pandemics and take climate change action. 
• France fully supports the broad, modern vision of development financing, rallying all stakeholders and available sources of financing, as it is endorsed in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda adopted by the Third International Conference on Financing for Development in July 2015. 
• To this end, the French Agency for Development has a wide range of financial tools (grants, soft loans and hard loans to public and private partners, equity stakes, guarantees, etc.) and works with an array of players. It is one of the rare development institutions able to directly assist local government bodies. Private sector engagement in development policies is also encouraged. 
• In 2016, France adopted a strategy entitled “Let’s Innovate Together” to prompt businesses to take corporate social responsibility (CSR) to the next level and encourage social and cooperative economic initiatives. France has also stepped up its support for non-state entities in recent years with the aim of doubling funds allocated to non-governmental organisations from 2012 to 2017. 
• Different tools are used depending on the partner country’s level of development and the issues addressed. By way of illustration, two-thirds of French Agency for Development grants are earmarked for 16 priority poor countries in Sub-Saharan 
Africa. 
• In early 2016, France launched a reform of its development cooperation mechanism by establishing links between the French Agency for Development and the Deposits and Loans Fund and giving it a larger budget to build its intervention capacities and its multi-partner dimension. 
 
	3) 	THE METHOD USED TO MONITOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT GOALS: THE CHOICE OF A PARTICIPATORY FRAMEWORK 

 
 INTERMINISTERIAL COORDINATION BASED ON THE PRIME MINISTER’S AUTHORITY AND THE MINISTERS’ PERSONAL COMMITMENT 
• The Interministerial Representative for Sustainable Development and General Commissioner for Sustainable Development steered the drafting of this first report on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, as tasked by the Prime Minister. She heads up the network of senior officials for sustainable development. 
• On 6 June 2016, Ségolène Royal, Minister of the Environment, Energy and the Sea, in charge of Sustainable Development, and André Vallini, Minister of State for Development and Francophonie, launched consultative workshops on the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. These workshops held at the end of Sustainable Development Week were attended by over 180 participants from all walks of life: international solidarity, the environment, social sectors, education, etc. 
 WORK IS UNDERWAY TO DEVELOP INDICATORS TO MONITOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
• France has been closely involved in the process to define global indicators to monitor the Sustainable Development Goals. These indicators will be formally endorsed by the UN General Assembly in the near future. The French National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (INSEE) is already conducting a feasibility study with all the ministries’ statistical departments on their production at national level. The government statistics system should 

                                                                             be able to produce just over half of the indicators (given or comparable definition) in the short to medium term. The indicators could be transposed nationally. 
• In keeping with the objective to develop new wealth indicators, the Act of 13 April 2015 has given France ten new wealth indicators. These indicators are presented in the appendix to this first report and are to be factored into public policymaking to extend the measurement of progress beyond mere gross domestic product. They cover employment, investment, national debt, health, inequalities, education, environmental protection and happiness. 
• These indicators, driven by the 2030 Agenda, are consistent with the national reform programme, which is the national version of the European Commission’s Europe 2020 strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. 
 THE GOVERNMENT HAS CHOSEN BROAD-BASED ENGAGEMENT WITH CIVIL SOCIETY RIGHT FROM THIS PILOT PHASE. 
• France considers that the involvement of civil society, the private sector and the general public is key to the success of the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals and, more generally, to public policymaking. It considers that deepening democracy is one of the best responses to the rise of all forms of radicalism and exclusion. 
• National representative civil society bodies such as the National Council for Ecological Transition, the National Council for Development and International Solidarity and the National Advisory Commission on Human Rights were consulted in the preparation of this report. The Economic, Social and Environmental Council was also tasked by the Prime Minister with submitting a report in the autumn to inform the next Interministerial Committee for International Cooperation and Development (CICID) meeting. 
• A committee of international experts was set up to inform government thinking on the development of the next national action plan. The multidisciplinary nature of this committee is designed to guarantee a holistic approach to the challenges and better capture the systemic nature of the Sustainable Development Goals. 
• A public consultation open to all has been launched on the Internet to guarantee the inclusiveness of the consultation process. 
 NEXT STEPS: DEVELOP A NATIONAL ACTION PLAN FOR THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
• A national action plan will be developed, working with all players at each stage (definition, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and regular reviews). 
• Under a parliamentary mission mandate, the ministries’ general inspectorates could analyse sector policies conducted in their areas to produce a more detailed public policy evaluation with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals. The findings of these evaluations could form the basis of recommendations and inform the public and civil debate. 
• The national action plan will be driven by the ambition of the broadest possible mobilisation for the success of the Sustainable Development Goals: shared vision, government measures and public policy guidelines for sustainable development, assistance to players in their fields of activity, especially economic players, citizens’ ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals, rollout at all levels (national, regional and local), international actions, especially with the European Union, the International Organisation of the Francophonie and the United Nations, synergies between and promotion of initiatives and good practices by all players, etc. 
 
• Regional consultative workshops could be held in autumn 2016 for local players to take up the Sustainable Development Goals and contribute to the national action plan. Shared local diagnoses could be conducted to identify the assets and challenges of the French mainland and overseas regions with respect to the 17 Sustainable Development Goals. The regional economic, social and environmental councils could be usefully associated with these diagnoses. 
• A participatory Internet platform (www.agendafrance2030.gouv.fr) will propose an open digital commons to all players and citizens to disseminate good practices and recommendations, monitor progress and rally coalitions. 
• Onboarding the Sustainable Development Goals could also be placed on the agenda of a next Interministerial Committee for International Cooperation and Development meeting. 
• Every year, European Sustainable Development Week will be a time to galvanise and promote society players’ projects.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Eradicate poverty in all its forms and the vulnerability of children under 18 
 	Reduce the proportion of poor workers, especially women raising their children alone 
 	Ensure the vulnerable have access to basic services 
 	Promote and encourage the rights-based approach internationally to effectively end poverty 
 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
Ensuring that the vulnerable have access to substantial benefits provided to house low-income fundamental rights is the first step on the road to households. Similarly, the poor have greater access to independence. The government has made poverty culture, sport, holidays and nature with the help of the eradication a policy priority with an additional envelope French network of associations. 
of over €2.6 billion budgeted through to In France, however, one in seven households 2017 to ensure access to basic services today lives below the poverty line and one in for all. Already in 2013, 6.8 million people 10% receive five children is highly vulnerable. Women made were receiving supplementary benefits supplementary up 52.9% of the poor in 2013 (INSEE) and 
(DREES, 2014).  	benefits 	unqualified young people were also more 
Housing for all is also a priority in France.  	DREES (2014) 	vulnerable. The country has a large proportion 

The enforceable right to housing is enshrined by law, with approximately 20% of main residences made up of social rented housing and 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France has always been committed to the United Nations’ recognition of the association between human rights and poverty eradication. The Development and International Solidarity Policy actively supports access to social services such as education and health so that everyone can live decently. This is why France has taken a rights-based approach throughout the negotiations: sexual and reproductive rights and the right to food, water and sanitation, education, housing, and so on. These are universal fundamental rights and conditions for sustainable development. They form the basis of a of poor workers, especially women raising their children alone, one-third of whom live below the poverty line. 
decent life for all. Their violation is both the cause and effect of poverty. France is determined for human rights to apply equally to all.  
 
Exclusion and deprivation breed unstable societies and political and social tensions. As the majority of those below the poverty line live in rural areas, securing rights to access land and natural resources is a pillar of poverty eradication. France has therefore committed to implement the voluntary guidelines on the governance of land tenure.  

.  
 
 
 
 
 
 	THE RIGHTS MEETINGS 
 At the end of 2011, an average half of  those eligible for the inclusion benefit  scheme (RSA) did not receive welfare  benefits either for want of information or out of fear of being stigmatised. The  “rights meetings” help the vulnerable  exercise their social rights. By 2014, the  family allowance funds (CAF) had  already held nearly 110,000 rights  meetings. The target for 2025 is to reduce the percentage of non-
 	recipients to 20%. 
 	 
 
 
THE SOCIAL AND SOLIDARITY ECONOMY (ESS) generated over two million jobs and was the number one social action sector employer in 2013. It covers associations, cooperatives, mutual benefit associations, foundations and commercial companies that meet the following conditions: social utility, keeping employee wage gaps narrow, democracy at work and a low, if not zero weight of shareholders.  

 	POVERTY PLAN 
 The 2015-2017 Multiannual Poverty Eradication and  Social Inclusion Plan is innovative in helping people  gain greater access to jobs, housing, rights and  education. One of its flagship measures is the creation of the in-work benefit. A total of 5.6 million 
Access to rights has been established as a government priority and is consequently one of the founding principles of the Multiannual Plan (the “legitimate right”) with an approach that extends beyond thelens of social rights.   workers are eligible, including one million young  people, for an estimated €4 billion in expenditure  per year. The 2014 pension reform has also improved  the rights of the most insecure workers. 
  	 
 
 Local authorities are launching innovative actions  such as a SOCIAL MICROCREDIT to reduce banking  exclusion by paying half the sum of interest. 
 
 
 	 
 	Promoting financial inclusion is another aspect of France’s action 
     IN CÔTE D’IVOIRE, France supports women who get together to   form VILLAGE SAVINGS BANKS to empower them and help them out  of poverty. In NIGER, where over 85% of the population lives on  less than $2 per day and has no access to the banking sector, 
 France supports the CREATION OF A MICROFINANCE INSTITUTION IN NIAMEY for small informal businesses. 
 
	 	15 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
	 	Ensure safe, sufficient food for all and end all forms of malnutrition 
 Scale up productive agricultural practices that maintain ecosystems and strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change 
	 	Maintain the genetic diversity of species and share the benefits arising from their utilisation 
	 	Ensure the proper functioning of the food commodity markets to limit price volatility 
	 	Improve the environmental and economic aspects of family farming as a vehicle to end malnutrition 
 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
France promotes family farming that creates wealth and In addition, innovative local authorities and players are jobs and respects ecosystems and biodiversity. The promoting the use of local food systems based on short country is actively engaged in reducing food waste circuits between producers and consumers: farmland (reported by the French Environment and Energy safeguards, support for small farms and family farming, Management Agency to cost €100 to €160 per person land tenure policies in support of equal access to land, per year in 2015) and developing more creation of local food governance councils, responsible, climate-smart agriculture. For End 2012,  increase in the share of organic products in example, the French organic market has 4,7 % institutional catering, etc. However, with part doubled in size in five years and France has of the population growing poorer, requests the third largest organic farming surface of French farms for food aid are on the rise. In France, 12% of area in the European Union, standing at were engaged in an adults live in a household in a situation of 4.14% of the French utilisable agricultural organic farming cash-strapped food insecurity (ONPES, 2010). 
area in 2014 (Agence Bio) for a target 8% by approach. 2017 (Ambition Bio 2017 programme).  
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France promotes family farming that creates wealth and jobs and respects ecosystems and biodiversity. The aim is to increase food and nutrition security, mainly in SubSaharan Africa, with support to family farms, the food and livestock sectors, and agricultural and food and nutrition policies.  
 
With the help of French research bodies such as the 
Agricultural 	Research 	Centre 	for 	International Development (CIRAD), France provides assistance to cope with the changes made necessary by the dual challenge of demographic growth and climate change. Here, it promotes initiatives designed to restore and raise soil fertility and the adoption of agroecological practices. It builds people’s resilience to economic, political and climate shocks. With the French Agency for Development, France supports the economic, social and environmental development of over 770,000 family farms worldwide today, thereby promoting diverse, sustainable food systems.  
 
The eradication of undernourishment is also one of the priorities of France’s Development and International Solidarity Policy. In this area, France takes a multisector approach to further nutrition-smart humanitarian and development programmes. France is working with its partners to mainstream the elimination of hunger and malnutrition. It plays an active role in improving global governance in this area within the European Union, the United Nations organisations in which it is a member, the Committee on World Food Security, the G20 and the G7. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 FOOD AID 
Many associations (Restos du Coeur, Red Cross, 
 Secours Populaire Français, etc.), food banks  and social and solidarity supermarkets collect  and redistribute food donated by the public and  provided by the Fund for European Aid to the 
 Most Deprived (FEAD) and National Social 
Supermarket Allocations (CNES). 
 
 
 
 NUTRITION AND HEALTH 
 Nutritional quality and balance are the pillar of the nutritional goals for public health set by the 
 High Council for Public Health (HCSP) and the  National Nutritional Health Programme (PNNS)  actions.  
  
 
 
Share of organically farmed surface areas by département  	RESPONSIBLE AGRICULTURE 
 	at the end of 2012 	The 13 October 2014 Act on the Future of 
  	Agriculture, Food and Forestry provides for 
	the 	practical 	implementation 	of 
 
agroecology: farmer training, regulations 
 	restricting the use of pesticides and  	antibiotics, sustainable seeds plan, and   biocontrol (natural plant protection  	methods). The act also endorses support for  	small-scale family farming. The Agriculture 
Innovation 2025 plan scales up research in 
 	the area. France also introduced a ban on  	farming genetically modified organisms  	(GMOs) on French soil in 2008. 
 	 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An INTERMINISTERIAL GROUP ON FOOD SECURITY (GISA) PLATFORM was set up in 2008 to feed into enhanced multistakeholder dialogue on food security and nutrition in the developing countries. It has produced a first roadmap. 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
	 	Maintain a high level of healthy, long life expectancy and well-being 
	 	Achieve universal health coverage and easy access to healthcare 
	 	Eradicate environmental health risk inequalities 
	 	Work to end the major epidemics (HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria) 
	 	Achieve equal access for all to healthcare and health services 
 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
The French social security system was founded in 1945 to “ensure that everyone should have the means required to support themselves and their family in decent conditions, in all circumstances.” The “means required” cover: health insurance, occupational injuries and diseases, pensions and family benefits. To ensure the sustainability of the French health system, the government is currently making savings to restore the balance of the social security accounts, optimising hospital expenditure, reducing the price of medicine and promoting generic drugs. For the future, France needs to take up two major challenges: equal access to 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France has a proactive international health policy. It has made sexual and reproductive health one of its priorities. Some €500 million were allocated to the Muskoka Initiative from 2011 to 2015, reducing maternal, newborn and child mortality. In 2016, France again earmarked €10 million for this initiative.  
 
France also works on building the capacities of national health systems to increase their resilience to crises, a weakness tragically illustrated by the Ebola epidemic in 2015. This work concentrates mainly on ten Frenchspeaking African countries and Haiti. To this end, France funds an array of projects to improve health security and actively participates in research with Aviesan and the REACTing consortium. On the UN High-Level Commission on Health Employment and Economic healthcare nationwide and the ageing of the French population whose life expectancy at birth stood at 85.1 years for women and 79 years for men in mainland France in 2015 (INSEE). This entails preparing for new needs and new forms of intergenerational solidarity and their financing. France also needs to scale up its disabled persons policy with work on accessibility, vulnerability and inclusion in society. 
From 1995 to 2012, healthy life expectancy rose from 62.4 to 63.8 years for women and from 60 to 
62.6 years for men  
Eurostat 
Growth set up by the United Nations in March 2015 and cochaired by the President of the French Republic, France also plays a driving role in thinking on human healthcare resources. Universal health coverage, the cornerstone of health for all, is a key French priority. France supports the UHC 2030 project at the highest level in the multilateral organisations. 
 
France’s international health solidarity is based on a partnership approach in keeping with SDG 17. It works with a range of players, its operators such as the French Agency for Development (AFD) and Expertise France, and civil society. France recognises in particular the leading role played by NGOs in the Ebola virus epidemic in 2012, from alerting the international community through caring for patients on the ground to prevention and follow-up. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 THE HEALTHCARE INNOVATION INVESTMENT FUND, has a budget of  €340 million to assist sector entrepreneurs with their projects and  promote the spread of healthcare innovations. In addition, public and private research bodies work together on the 
 Strategic Advisory Board on the Health Industries (CSIS) to  disseminate innovations and monitor antibiotic resistance. 
 	 
 
 
 THE HEALTH ACT Three strands structure the health  system’s modernisation: innovation for prevention 
 (health education, information campaigns and screening), innovation for local healthcare (system of  direct payment by insurers for medical treatment, local  medical treatment and the public hospital service) and  innovation to increase patients’ rights and safety 
     (confidentiality, drug safety, abortion and digital  modernisation). Also of note is the creation of the  French Public Health Agency. 
 
 
REGIONAL HEALTHCARE PACT Launched in December 2012,  the Regional Healthcare Pact offers incentives to young  doctors to establish their practices in underserved areas.  It is also designed to develop healthcare infrastructures  
such as multidisciplinary health centres and healthcare clusters. 	 
 	 
 
 
 
	 	GLOBAL FUND TO FIGHT AIDS, TUBERCULOSIS AND MALARIA  
 France is the number two contributor to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, to which it has just  renewed its pledge of €1.08 billion for the next three years. It  is the leading contributor to UNITAID, providing over half of  the organisation’s funds. It supports the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI). In total, France channels over €500 million a year into these three bodies. 
ROAD SAFETY  
HEALTH AND CIVIL SOCIETY 
A 30-year associationbusiness partnership responds to humanitarian emergencies with pooled funds and emergency kits containing new, locally appropriate healthcare products. 
 
THE 	3RD 	NATIONAL 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH PLAN for 2015 – 2019 is designed to reduce the impacts of environmental factors on health and the inequality of exposure to these impacts: air and water pollution, effects of pesticides on health, endocrine disruptors, noise, waves, nanomaterials, etc. In 2015, France banned bisphenol A from food containers and is working to scale up the regulations on pesticides. 
 
PROTECTION FOR ALL 
The Universal Healthcare System 
(PUMA) now guarantees healthcare cost coverage to everyone working or living in France, without the need for any particular formalities. 
 

Road fatalities in mainland France fell from 17,000 a year in the early 1970s to 3,500 a year in 2015. Measures have been adopted to reduce speeds and harmonise legislation at European level to roll back the number of deaths from 3,000 to 2,000 by 2020. 

 ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND QUALITY EDUCATION FOR ALL AND 
 PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING 
 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Ensure access for all to affordable higher education and technical and vocational training 
 	Eliminate gender disparities in education and ensure access to education for the vulnerable 
 	Provide universal sustainable development education 
 Ensure that all boys and girls in France and worldwide complete a full cycle of education (pre-primary, primary and secondary) 
 	Upgrade the quality of education systems and education worldwide 
 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
The French Constitution states that, “The provision of free, public and secular education at all levels is a duty of the State.” The education system is founded on the principle of free, secular, neutral education in academic freedom and compulsory schooling for all French and foreign 	children aged 	6 	to 	16 
	In 2015, 88.6% of 	residing in France. 
young people passed their The July 2013 secondary school exams Pluriannual French 
(occupational proficiency certificate, 
vocational certificate, baccalauréat, ..)  Republic School 2015 National Education figures Reform Policy Act is designed to correct 
the impact of social and economic inequalities on academic achievement by upgrading teaching and education in schools and establishments in socially disadvantaged areas and to reduce the educational attainment gap between priority education zone pupils 
 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France has made a focus of access for all to a skills base and training support. French assistance since 2013 has put over 2.4 million children worldwide through primary and lower secondary school and enrolled 370,000 young people on vocational training courses. In SubSaharan Africa, France is scaling up access to quality basic education for all: in Togo and Benin, the French Agency for Development (AFD) is assisting the lower secondary school reform; in Mali, it is working to reduce geographic and gender disparities while improving the system’s decentralisation and devolution.  
In 2016, France contributed €8 million to the Global Partnership for Education (GPE) and intends to take and pupils in the rest of France to less than 10%. Work needs to continue to establish a social mix within French schools. In 2013, a total of 660,000 or 35% of all students received a grant for an eligible course (National Education Ministry, 2015). In addition, lifelong environmental and sustainable development education has been developed for all. The educational establishments are working in support of the Sustainable Development Goals.  
With 78.3% of baccalauréat holders in one generation in 2015, France has virtually achieved its target 80% baccalauréat pass rate. Nevertheless, the weight of social class in academic achievement remains high and an estimated 20% of pupils have academic difficulties.  In 2014, 8.8% or some 500,000 of 18-24 year olds living in mainland France were early school leavers. The European target is less than 10%. forward this commitment. This fund represents a source of stabilisation in many of the French development policy’s priority countries by improving the structure of the education sector and coordination between players at national level.  
 
The GPE has an important role to play in the continuum from emergency to development. France consequently supports the GPE as the future host structure for the Education Cannot Wait platform launched at the 2016 UN World Humanitarian Summit. 
 
 
 
 
 
The NATIONAL BUSINESS AND EDUCATION COUNCIL associates business professionals with education professionals to steer forward planning on the linkage between the education system and the business world’s needs.  
 
ENCOURAGE PUPILS IN DISADVANTAGED AREAS TO KEEP STUDYING 
The National Education Ministry has launched a reform of the priority education policy, developing staff training and teamwork around standards that form sound bases for academic achievement. The Cordées de la 
Réussite university entry programme and the Parcours d’Excellence lower secondary coaching and cultural programme have set up mentoring relationships between university students and lower and upper secondary pupils. 
 
THE CIVIC RESERVE 
The Civic Reserve gives all citizens the possibility to work as volunteers to convey and put into practice the values of the French Republic at school alongside teachers. 
 
INNOVATION FOR EDUCATION 
In May 2015, the Economic, Social and Environmental Council published the “A School for Success for All” report based on innovative collaborative work with parents living in extreme poverty. The report pinpoints three fundamentals: inclusion, social and school diversity, and public evaluation and support of civic initiatives. A collaborative platform presents all these experiences and recommendations: reussitedetous.lecese.fr  
 
The PROFESSIONS AND SKILLS CAMPUSES establish close partnerships between educational establishments, business, research laboratories and associations to train young people for occupations that meet labour market needs. 
FREE TRAINING  
The Pôle Emploi job centres entitle jobseekers to free skills training. In 2016, a total of 500,000 jobseekers were trained. In addition, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are taking off in France to give everyone access to higher education courses. Over 150 courses are already available on the public FUN Platform (France Université Numérique). 
France promotes QUALITY EDUCATION FOR GIRLS free of gender-based violence. It is working on a project in WEST AFRICA to eradicate school-related gender-based violence and has tabled a resolution on this issue at 
UNESCO. 

 ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWER 
 ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	End all forms of discrimination 
 	Eliminate all forms of violence against women and girls and guarantee their freedoms and their rights  	Promote shared domestic responsibilities between men and women. 
 Achieve access for women to all economic sectors, guarantee equal pay for equal work and promote access to  leadership positions 
 Promote the economic, political and social empowerment of women, including their access to sexual and reproductive health and rights, at international level 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
France enshrines in its supreme rule of law (the French Constitution) the right to equality for all citizens irrespective of gender. Legislative measures have been taken to ensure gender equality at work (Act on Balanced Gender Representation on Boards of Directors and Equality in the Workplace) and in politics (June 2000 Act on Gender Equality in Politics). However, this body of law is not enforced consistently across the minutes per day on domestic work as opposed to 2 hours for men (INSEE – 2010). Last but not least, the June 2000 gender equality act may well have considerably improved female representation in politics, but at the current rate of progress, it will take France 25 years to achieve parity in numbers of seats. Although inequalities are narrowing in education, where girls made up 57% of university students in 2014 as opposed to 43% in 1961, course choices still board and inequalities persist. In terms of differ with a male majority in the scientific remuneration, men still earn 23.5% more Men earn fields. Since 2013, the High Council for on average than women for the same Gender Equality, an advisory body reporting number of working hours, especially in 23.5% more on directly to the Prime Minister, has been executive positions. Even though the gap in average than women holding discussions with stakeholders to unemployment rates has virtually closed, for the same number define and improve public policy guidelines women are more often found in insecure, of working hours on rolling back stereotypes, gender equality, involuntary part-time work with less (INSEE) reproductive rights and gender violence. 
responsibility. They spend 3 hours 26 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
Gender equality is a driver for sustainable development and an accelerator for change towards fairer societies. France’s Gender and Development Strategy makes foreign policy on women’s rights a central pillar of its foreign affairs action. The aim is for at least 50% of projects financed to significantly or comprehensively target the reduction of gender inequalities by 2017. France is working on empowering women in the form of their economic empowerment (Algeria, Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia), their employability (in association with French multinationals) and their leadership (with the Women of the Mediterranean: Next Generation of Leaders programme). The French vision for the world is one where no woman need risk her life to terminate an unwanted pregnancy and where everyone, male and female, has free access to quality healthcare. It is a world where everyone has access to full sex education  
and young people are no longer at risk of harmful practices. Enabling women to choose how many children they have and when is to empower them to choose how they live their own lives. Sexual and reproductive rights are also associated with the demographic dynamics that continue to shape the main sustainable development challenges.  
 
France has produced its first international cooperation strategy on population and sexual and reproductive health and rights challenges for 2016-2020. It concentrates on West Africa to achieve three priority targets: 1) Improve international, regional and national legislative frameworks for sexual and reproductive rights, 2) Improve access to modern contraception methods, and 3) Facilitate access by adolescents and young people to sexual and reproductive health services and reduce harmful practices.  22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 	ELIMINATE VIOLENCE 
 The Government has doubled the resources  allocated to violence against women with an additional €66 million over a three-year period  (2014-2016 Interministerial Plan). The acts against  sexual harassment (2012) and for real gender  equality (2014) have rolled out the “grave danger telephone” system, the eviction of the violent  spouse from the home and responsible behaviour  courses for perpetrators of violence.  
 
 
 
 
 Real access to ABORTION and CONTRACEPTION has been facilitated with full coverage of the entire  process (consultations, analyses and ultrasound),  free and confidential access to contraception for  minors aged 15 to 18, the free morning-after pill at  university and scaled-up local abortion facilities nationwide. Information has also been ramped up  with the opening of a reference website 
 	(ivg.gouv.fr). 
 	 
 
 
 
The Act of 13 April 2016 is designed to step up ACTION AGAINST THE SYSTEM OF PROSTITUTION, assist prostituted persons and establish the criminalisation of their clients. 
 
PARENTAL LEAVE has been reformed to shorten the average period mothers are away from work and involve fathers. Part of parental leave is now reserved for the second parent (six months for a first birth and 12 months for subsequent births). 
 
EQUALITY IN THE WORKPLACE 
France has launched an Interministerial Plan for Gender Equality in the Workplace, which will be rolled out in mainland and overseas France. CAC 40 company boards have become more female (by 5.7 percentage points from 2012 to 2014): France is a European leader in this area with 30.3% of women on boards, brought about by the Act on Balanced Gender Representation on Boards of Directors and Equality in the Workplace (2011). 

ENSURE ACCESS TO WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL 
 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Encourage responsible water consumption practices and achieve equitable access 
 	Protect water catchment areas by fostering agroecological practices 
 	Improve risk analysis of micropollutants, especially endocrine disruptors, and nanomaterials in water  	Anticipate the impacts of climate change on water resources 
 	Improve access to drinking water and sanitation in developing countries 
 	Promote integrated water resources management (IWRM) at international level 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
Water is the nation’s common heritage. Everyone has Directive adopted in 2000 and driven by water the right to use water and to affordable quality drinking development and management master plans (SDAGEs). water (1992 Water Act). The polluter pays principle Each water basin is the responsibility of a water agency that 
(Article 4 of the Charter for the plans and finances management operations Environment) has been established to for balanced, economical management of the finance water sanitation in part. In 2013, 48% of surface water resource and aquatic environments, only half of France’s surface water water has a good the supply of drinking water, regulation of (watercourses, lakes and coastal waters) chemical status high water and sustainable development of and 67% of its groundwater had a SOeS  economic activities. 

reportedly “good chemical status”, i.e. 	 
complied with the quality standards set for the major pollutants. Water management in France is based on the principles enacted by the EU Water Framework 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
Water is a cross-cutting issue: it concerns health, hygiene, nutrition and education in addition to the environment and climate. France is committed to integrated water resources management as an instrument of good governance, especially with the 1992 Helsinki Convention and the 1997 New York Convention. It works for access to drinking water and sanitation for all. The French Agency for Development (AFD) allocated nearly €800 million in new project and programme financing to the water and sanitation sector in 2015. These funds will provide 2.3 million people with sustainable access to drinking water and will improve the quality of the drinking water supply system for 11.1 million people. They will also guarantee access Lastly, research uses satellite observation and digital simulation techniques to help manage the evolution of 	watersheds 	and 	ground 	water 	for 	agriculture.
to sanitation for 400,000 people and improve the quality of the sanitation system for 1.5 million. 
 
French legislation promotes innovative financing, enabling local authorities to earmark 1% of their water and sanitation budget for development projects for our partners, for example, and the allocation of part of the funds raised by the financial transaction tax to the African Development Bank’s Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Initiative (RWSSI) from 2013 to 2015. In addition to the operational track, France takes part in think tanks to improve global governance of the water sector to achieve the 2030 Agenda goals.  
 
 
 
 
 
ACCESS TO WATER FOR ALL  
The Government and numerous associations are working to secure access to drinking water and sanitation for people without physical access to these services (in overseas areas, the homeless and refugees, etc.) Local authorities and businesses are testing water rates and new aid systems to guarantee equitable access to water. Degressive rates are also being piloted for the most responsible consumers. Lastly, agreements are being signed with farmers to conserve drinking water and reduce sanitation costs. 
OVERSEAS FRANCE WATER PLAN The action plan for drinking water and sanitation services in Guadeloupe, French Guiana, Martinique, Reunion, Mayotte and Saint Martin was announced at the 2016 environmental conference to help the communities improve the service provided to their users and work towards the sustainable management of the services. 
PROTECTING WATER 
The 3rd National Environmental Health Plan (PNSE3) has been developed to create 600 new protected water catchment areas per year with a statement of public utility. The plan is also set to put in place action plans to tackle diffuse pollution across 1,000 priority water catchment areas defined by the 20162021 water development and management master plans. 
ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE 
TRANSPARENT WATER SAFETY MONITORING 
Water is constantly monitored for safety. The public can look up the physicochemical quality of the water in their municipality online at any time: 
http://social-sante.gouv.fr/sante-etenvironnement/eaux/article/qualite-de-l-eau-potable 
Average concentration of pesticides in the watercourses (water agencies/water boards/The French National Agency for Water and Aquatic 
Environments) 

At COP21, France signed the Paris Pact on Water and Climate Change Adaptation in river basins, lakes and aquifers. It also worked to mainstream the role of water in climate change adaptation. 
Thirteen projects totalling over €450 million have contributed to climate change mitigation. These projects have improved knowledge of the climate risks weighing on water resources (International Commission of the. Congo-Oubangui-Sangha Basin (CICOS) and Mekong River Commission), reduced the risks of urban flooding (Dakar and Moundou), cleaned up coastal areas (DEPOLMED Tunisia), and harnessed new resources (Dhaka, 
Bangladesh) 
 
 ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE,  
 SUSTAINABLE AND MODERN ENERGY FOR ALL 
 
  
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Increase the share of renewable energy with a stable financial and incentive framework 
 End energy poverty and ensure responsible energy management with economical consumption and sustainable resources management in generation 
 	Define a coherent action framework (supply and demand) for the energy transition 
 	Develop access to efficient energy services for all, especially in non-interconnected areas, as part of the energy transition 
 	Promote renewable energies and smart solutions tailored to the different geographic situations 
 
 
CHALLENGES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
The energy transition needs to happen now, with energy savings and efficiency (certified low-consumption technological and technical innovations to reduce and high environmental quality buildings, clean cars, etc.) greenhouse gas emissions. France undertook, upstream and the use of renewable energies. France also has the of COP2, to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 40% support of key players such as the major energy sectors, below 1990 levels by 2030. To this end, the Energy producers and distributors, transmission and distribution 
Transition for Green Growth Act of 17 networks, energy user industries, and 
August 2015 set ambitious targets to solution providers in industry, increase the share of renewable energy 15% renewable energy in construction and transport, which are sources in final energy consumption final energy consumption in 2014 all global references for the energy from 15% in 2014 to 23% by 2020 (50% (+5.4% over 2005) transition. Yet INSEE-SOeS reported in overseas France) and 32% by 2030, SOeS  that over one in five households were 

and to bring down the share of nuclear power in electricity generation to 50% by 2025. Combining energy independence with affordable renewable energy is a major challenge. A wide range of public policies have been put in place to encourage 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France has pledged over €2 billion through to 2020 for the development of renewable energies in Africa, where the Sub-Saharan region has the lowest regional electrification rate in the world at 31%. Electricity is vital for access to education, health and better living conditions, not to mention sustainable economic development. At COP21, France supported major international energy initiatives such as the SIDS Lighthouse Initiative to raise financing and rapidly deploy renewable energy in small island developing states. France is also putting its technical expertise to work to decarbonise the energy mix in developing countries and emerging economies. It has undertaken to stop financing coal-fired power plants as of 2013. France is supporting energy vulnerable in 2014, warranting government aid for poor households. Islands not interconnected to the mainland electricity grid remain a challenge to find a balance between power supply and demand and generation costs. 
rural electrification, with projects for isolated systems and grid extension and densification. 
 
Last but not least, France is investing in research to improve energy efficiency and innovate in renewables. A total of €1.8 billion was invested in energy in 2013, including €440 million in new technologies: renewable energies, carbon capture and utilisation, storage, networks, etc. Decentralised off-grid solutions, urban district heating and hydraulic technology are just some of the actions France promotes through the French Agency for Development, with its total budget of over €3 billion for the 2013-2015 period.  

 
 
 
 
POSITIVE ENERGY TERRITORIES FOR GREEN GROWTH 
A Positive Energy Territory for Green Growth (PET-GG) is a place of excellence for energy and ecological transition: reducing the energy needs of inhabitants, buildings, economic activities and transport. A budget of €500,000 has been allocated to the local authorities for this. In addition, 212 bidders have won the call for tenders for high-power solar plants, an estimated 1,500 biogas plants will be built over three years following the call for projects, and offshore windfarm projects are in place. 
ENERGY CONSUMPTION IN THE HOME Among France’s measures to improve energy efficiency are the 2012 introduction of the 50 kWh/m2 per year energy use cap on new residences and the target of 500,000 energy-smart housing retrofits per year starting in 2017, with half of these earmarked for low-income occupants to roll back fuel poverty 15% by 2020. Regulatory solutions and incentives are in place, including a tax credit and the nointerest eco-loan.  
SHORT CIRCUIT 
French regional cooperatives offer 100% renewable energy on a short circuit directly from producers. 
The Action Agenda promoted by the French Presidency of COP21 generated some major international cooperative initiatives on energy in 2015. France takes an active part in a number of them, either having helped launch them (GLOBAL ALLIANCE FOR BUILDINGS AND 
	CONSTRUCTION 	and 	GLOBAL 
GEOTHERMAL ALLIANCE) or providing political and financial support (AFRICA RENEWABLE ENERGY INITIATIVE and SIDS LIGHTHOUSE INITIATIVE). These initiatives are designed to gear up the current pace of deployment and investment. 
POSITIVE ENERGY TERRITORIES FOR GREEN GROWTH 
528 applications 
2/3 of inhabitants concerned 
ENERGY CHEQUE 	 
The fuel-poverty energy cheque averaging at €150 is piloting in Ardèche, Aveyron, Côtes d’Armor and Pas-de-Calais. In addition, no one’s power can be cut off in France in winter by law.  
1,000 KM OF SOLAR HIGHWAY  
In partnership with the National Solar Energy Institute (INES), a French firm is piloting positive energy roads paved with solar panels glued on top of the existing road surface. 
 
France 	is 	assisting Morocco 	with 	the diversification 	of 	its energy sources under the 	NOOR 	SOLAR POWER 	PROGRAMME, which 	will 	reduce greenhouse 	gas emissions by some 3.7 million tonnes. 
PROMOTE SUSTAINED, INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE  ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND PRODUCTIVE  EMPLOYMENT AND DECENT WORK FOR ALL 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
	 	Encourage growth by facilitating administrative procedures for economic players 
	 	Take measures to help and support economic players (businesses and entrepreneurs) that create jobs 
	 	Support areas of activity with high employment potential 
	 	Strengthen the green economy, which enables the production of environmental goods and service 
	 	Support inclusion and vocational training policies in developing countries 
 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
France ranked fourth in the world in terms of for the Future scheme for young people and support for the productivity per capita in 2014. Nevertheless, given an long-term unemployed target specific disadvantaged unemployment rate which has not shown any lasting populations. The reform of vocational training in 2013 led fall since the 2008 crisis (10.2% of the active population to the introduction of more suitable tools to support shifts in France were unemployed in the first in the labour market. The prospects of an quarter of 2016), employment is one of the upturn seem good, especially as a result major challenges of the next few years. In 2013, 10% of the of investment in sectors of the future 
Unemployment particularly affects French such as the digital economy and energy salaried workforce was 
overseas 	territories 	(varying 	between transition. Business creation, sustainable employed in the social 
21.3% in French Guiana and 29% on tourism and the circular economy are 
and solidarity economy  Reunion Island), young people (24% of those aged 15-24) and migrants (20.7% of non-EU immigrants). By reducing the cost of labour, the national pact for competitiveness and employment aims to give businesses more scope to invest, explore new markets, encourage research and innovation, recruit, restore their working capital and support the ecological and energy transition. Other complementary measures such as cross-generation contracts, the Jobs 
 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
Taking action to promote fairer societies, productive full employment and decent work is a precondition for more sustainable economic growth. The Cape Initiative, launched with French impetus in 2008, includes a €250million guarantee fund (ARIZ) to give African SMEs easier access to bank lending and capital. Lines of credit opened with local banks and Proparco’s work in the financial sector encourage that dynamic, designed to support job-rich growth. The Arab Springs confirmed the need to integrate employment and training into a continuum of actions to favour development, in regions where young people are both a majority of the population and massively unemployed. The emphasis on vocational training in Tunisia and labour-intensive public INSEE 	other priority drivers of growth. The 
               French government has launched an initiative called “New Industrial France” which aims to position French firms on promising new economic markets. One of the objectives of the government’s “Industry of the Future” programme, which aims to modernise French industry through the use of digital technologies, is to make industrial processes more energy-efficient. work programmes that encourage workforce integration in Ivory Coast and the Central African Republic are indicative of France’s commitment. In 2015, France renewed its partnership with the International Labour Office (ILO). The various programmes rolled out in that context aim in particular to promote the principles and fundamental rights to work, the fight against child labour, formalisation of the informal economy, the foundations of social protection and corporate social responsibility (CSR) (see ODD 15). Conditional cash transfer programmes can be one response to the development of social protection schemes in this sector and can support formalisation of the economy.  
 

 
 
 
 
THE PUBLIC INVESTMENT BANK brings 
together all public business SUPPORT FOR YOUTH EMPLOYMENT financing measures, including 13,000 “starter” support for innovation, bank loan INDUSTRIES contracts reduce guarantees, working capital OF THE contributions employers who hire for financing and equity investment 
(€21.7 billion mobilised in 2014) FUTURE a person under 30  	living in a priority area or a person who is long-term unemployed. 
 
THE 	SRI 	SOCIALLY 	RESPONSBILE INVESTING 	LABEL 	recognises funds 	which 	combine financial and extra-financial 
performance, measured 	SME RECRUITMENT against green, social and 	SCHEME  governance criteria, and 	A company with support the development of 	fewer than 250 sustainable finance. Likewise, 	employees which the ENERGY AND ECOLOGICAL 	takes on a new 
TRANSITION FOR CLIMATE LABEL 	employee receives recognises funds which 	a €500 premium provide information about 	twice yearly for two their environmental footprint. 	years.  
 	 
THE INVESTMENT IN THE FUTURE PROGRAMME 
	TRANSNATIONAL LIABILITY 	has received nearly €47 billion in 
Draft legislation on the duty of care of parent funding to finance innovative and companies and contracting businesses, drawn promising investments since 2010. 1,473 up in response to the 2013 Rana Plaza collapse in projects have been supported to date Bangladesh, aims to assert the liability of in the spheres of research, training, the transnational companies in order to prevent the economy and industrial projects, digital occurrence of such tragedies in France or technologies, ecology and sustainable elsewhere and obtain compensation for victims mobility. 
in the event of damage affecting human rights or the environment. 
AFD supports the textiles industry in Cambodia with a twin aim: to help make it more competitive and to improve working and living conditions for employees. The BETTER FACTORIES CAMBODIA PROGRAMME ensures the quality of working conditions, finances a voluntary employee health insurance scheme and works with the textiles manufacturers association to improve skills in the local workforce. 
BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, PROMOTE  
 
 INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALISATION  
 
 AND FOSTER INNOVATION 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Modernise and ensure the sustainability of infrastructure 
 	Strengthen the environmental performance of industries 
 	Encourage innovation and support investment in research and development 
 	Encourage investment in low-carbon projects in France and elsewhere 
 Internationally, support the development of sustainable and resilient infrastructure that takes account of natural and climate change-related risks 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
The 2030 Agenda looks forward to an industrial world which respects the environment and makes rational use of natural resources, and in which research and innovation will be given greater support. France, with nearly 1 million km of roads, 30,000 km of railways, 8,500 km of waterways and 13 major sea and river ports, has a particularly dense transport infrastructure network. Maintaining and modernising infrastructure is a major challenge : maintaining, renewing and adapting technical reference frameworks for construction, maintenance and operation are key priorities for sustainable and resilient infrastructure. Projects must also give greater consideration to environmental performance (use of sustainable materials, small carbon footprint, etc.) and incorporate the preservation of biodiversity. 
Innovation ensures that growth addresses the major challenges to society of employment, energy, climate and health. France devoted 2.24% of GDP to spending on research and development in 2013 (INSEE), taking it into 10th place in the global ranking, but that is still less 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
To support transition in Africa, France, through AFD, is helping to develop infrastructure such as energy networks, roads, ports, railways and airports that is essential in order to open up isolated areas, promote economic activity and improve living conditions.  
 
It is also helping to develop the local industrial fabric by encouraging small and medium-sized businesses. Drawing on its experience of microfinance, AFD contributes to economic and industrial development while fostering innovation. In order to improve the quality and long-term viability of its sustainable than the 3% target set 
  In 2013, research and in the European development represented strategy to 2020. The 
€47-billion Investment in the Future 
2.24% of GDP,  
10th programme has been  in the global ranking 
rolled out since 2010 
INSEE 
 to finance innovative investment based on 
the knowledge economy and sustainable development. 71 competitiveness centres, bringing together public- and private-sector partners, have been created to mobilise key factors of competitiveness and innovation. In addition, the national pact for growth and employment aims to steer innovation towards the end market (value-added projects that can be industrialised) by emphasisng the partnership between research and business and the spread of digital technologies. France’s digital strategy also aims to ensure that everyone can take advantage of progress in digital technologies by providing comprehensive nationwide veryhigh-speed broadband coverage. 
development projects, it has introduced an independent sustainable development review into project assessments, indicating the project’s contribution to the five major sustainable development goals of economic growth, the fight against poverty, the fight against inequality, the preservation of biodiversity and the management of habitats and natural resources, and preservation of the atmosphere and the fight against climate change.  
 
 
 

 
BUSINESS INNOVATION 
The research tax credit helps companies with their spending on research and development and innovation. The 2012 pact for competitiveness, growth and employment extended the scheme to small and mediumsized enterprises (SMEs). Outlays of €5.7 billion were financed in 2013, with 23,000 firms benefiting from the scheme. 
 
GREEN LOANS FOR BETTER ENVIRONMENTAL OUTCOMES   
Green loans mainly finance both tangible investment (optimisation of resources and processes) and intangible investment (ecodesign, implementation of certification schemes, compliance with environmental standards). Loans of up to €3 million may be granted without security or guarantee to companies that have been in existence for more than three years. 
 
AFD is involved in the REHABILITATION OF 
ABIDJAN AIRPORT IN IVORY COAST and in the development of related infrastructure, including the provision of utility services for a business park around the airport which will help to enhance the city’s regional attractiveness. 
 

 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Combat all forms of discrimination in France and elsewhere 
 	Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequality, in particular through social protection  
 	Improve the reception and integration of foreigners who are legal residents 
 	Step up the regulation and supervision of global financial institutions and markets 
 	Approach the economic and environmental transition from the standpoint of solidarity 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
France has a legal system which protects human rights discriminatory threats increasing by 26% in 2015 (DILCRA, and an acknowledged system for the redistribution of 2016), the fight against discrimination is very much wealth in order to combat inequality between ongoing, as illustrated by the national individuals. Furthermore, inter-regional campaign against racism, sexism and 
                                        The wealthiest 10% of solidarity mechanisms link wealth-producing homophobia. 	The 	legalisation 	of households own  areas, mostly major cities, with regions same-sex marriage in 2013 opened up undergoing restructuring. However, inequality 	48% of assets, 	new rights for homosexuals, based on remains a key challenge in France. Where the principles of equality and shared whereas the poorest 50% equal 	opportunity 	is 	concerned, 	the freedoms. On the issue of managing of households own  correlation between educational performance migration, France helps to support and socio-economic background is still strong. 	7% of assets 	host countries, stabilise the political 
The 	dignity 	of 	the 	poorest 	and 	their situation in countries in crisis and 
INSEE (2010) 
representation present another challenge: manage the migration crisis caused by draft legislation to combat discrimination due the influx of refugees into Europe. to social insecurity aims to ensure the Effective provision for migrants and effectiveness of the rights of people in poverty. With their integration remain challenges for the years to come. 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
1% of the world’s population in 2016 owns half its saving, investment and business creation in their home wealth. That increase in inequality on a global scale can countries. also be seen within countries. 	 
Migrants and diasporas make an important contribution France is an active participant in the fight against to the development of host countries and countries of discrimination, violence and breaches of human rights origin. They are key sources of financing: over US$ 400 perpetrated against lesbians, gays, bisexuals and trans billion were sent to developing countries in 2015. and/or intersex people (LGBTI) all over the world. France has set up the envoidargent.fr website, which Homosexual relations are still punishable by imprisonment compares money transfer services and has led to a or even death in over 70 countries. That is unacceptable. reduction of more than 30% in the average cost of such France will continue to strive towards a clear goal: the services since 2009. It also encourages diasporas to universal decriminalisation of homosexuality. allocate such transfers on a longer-term basis, favouring 
  
 
 

 TAX REDISTRIBUTION 
 The social and tax reforms introduced in recent  years are designed to increase redistribution to the least well-off while taking measures to  restore public finances through savings  targeting the better-off (reform of family  allowances, reform of the taxation of unearned income, etc.) 
 
 
 
 RECEPTION AND INTEGRATION OF MIGRANTS  The law on asylum reform was passed in July 
 2015, streamlining procedures and achieving a better distribution of migrants nationwide.  The law of 8 March 2016 on the right of  foreigners in France introduced a general  entitlement to a multiyear residence permit for foreigners after a year’s residence in France,  strengthened integration measures with the  establishment of a republican integration  programme and reasserted foreigners’ rights. 
   Another aim of the law is to extend a better  welcome to talents and excellence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 AFD supports the solid PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN  THE STATE OF MINAS GERAIS IN BRAZIL AND  THE NORD-PAS-DE-CALAIS REGION in the sphere of regional development and the 
 development of competitiveness centres. 
 
 
 
 
 
UNITED AGAINST HATRED 
The 2015-17 plan to combat racism and antiSemitism is based on four main initiatives: national mobilisation backed up by an awareness-raising campaign, tougher penalties for racist or antiSemitic acts, the protection of internet users from the propagation of hatred, and education of the population through teaching and culture. 
COMBATING INEQUALITY OVERSEAS 
Regional inequality is a particularly sensitive issue in French overseas territories, especially with regard to access to employment and training, housing and healthcare. It is measured in relation to mainland France but also between overseas territories. An interministerial delegation has been set up to ensure that French overseas citizens enjoy equal access to employment, housing and banking services. It also takes steps to promote and enhance the image of French overseas citizens and combat stereotyping. 


 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Ensure  access to housing and services for all and increase social diversity in cities   	Establish shared governance for collective construction of the urban environment 
	 	Strengthen the sustainability of cities  and preserve the architectural heritage 
	 	Encourage urban resilience by enhancing risk prevention 
	 	Encourage the emergence of innovations and develop smart cities 
	 	Internationally, encourage inclusive, sound and resilient urban development  
 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
At a time when cities are continuing to grow rapidly by and by stepping up initiatives to help disadvantaged expanding towards peripheral areas, the development of areas, including a fair distribution of social housing more sustainable cities is a major challenge in order to between local communities, urban renovation, economic improve residents’ quality of life in terms of housing, restructuring and access to services such as transport and transport and services, ensure thriving green spaces. At a time when nearly 3 million economic activity and limit the artificialisation people are inadequately housed (Fondation of land, the consumption of resources and 141,500 Abbé Pierre, 2016), access to housing is a the deterioration of air quality and the people in mainland priority. Major French cities are investing environment. Part of the solution to these France are substantially in the development of problems lies in innovative and high-quality “homeless” accessible public transport and soft mobility architectural and urban development INSEE (2013) initiatives such as cycle paths and bike-projects, prepared with the participation of residents and all stakeholders. The growth of large cities must not be detrimental to smaller communities. The fight against social and geographical segregation must also be continued by promoting urban and social diversity 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
More than a billion people live in impoverished neighbourhoods, a number which could double by 2030. The issue is to integrate these neighbourhoods into the urban fabric by reducing exclusion among those who live in them. From combating deprivation to ensuring access to essential services, sustainability and economic and job opportunities, there is no shortage of challenges in order to construct the urban environment of the future. The Dominican Republic has sought help from France for a three-pronged programme to extend the metro, establish a waterway transport system and rationalise the urbanisation of waterside areas.  In response to a call from the COP Presidency, at the COP 21 climate conference more than 7,000 cities and regions around the world representing nearly a fifth of the world’s population gave sometimes highly ambitious commitments. With a group of states, they share schemes. Regions must be careful to preserve the richness of their cultural, architectural and natural heritage and to strengthen their resilience, especially with regard to the impacts of climate change. 
also launched a five-year vision that will intensify their responses to climate change. That movement will be given further impetus by the establishment of an annual summit (Climate Chance in Nantes in 2016). 
 
The Habitat III conference in Quito from 17 to 20 October 
2016, the preparation of which has been jointly overseen by France and Ecuador, will be a unique opportunity to structure a framework for implementing the Sustainable Development Goals at city level. French local authorities are active in United Cities and Local Governments, the leading global cities organisation. They contribute to the framing of international positions looking forward to the Quito conference, highlighting the climate change and sustainable development initiatives taken at COP 21, and campaign for more inclusive, open and welcoming cities. 
 ENERGY 	-EFFICIENT HOUSING 
 The housing energy renovation plan aims for the renovation of 500,000 housing units a year by 2017  and a 38% reduction in energy consumption in the  building sector by 2020, backed up by exceptional  premiums and sustainable development tax credits, with priority being given to tackling energy poverty.  Likewise, increasingly extensive use of the HQE High  Environmental Quality and BBC low-energy labels  helps to promote the most energy-efficient buildings. 
 
 
 
 
 RISKS AND SMART CITIES  	 
 becoming increasingly prevalent, in particular to Decision-support services for local authorities are  forestall hydro-meteorological risks such as flooding,  storms, heavy snowfall and rising sea levels. Natural risk  prevention plans and local planning programmes incorporate the impacts of climate change on the 
 	reassessment of at-risk areas. 
 
 
 ACCOMMODATION FOR PEOPLE IN DIFFICULTY 
 On the issue of emergency provision for the homeless   or inadequately housed, the government has set up a 
 €105-million appropriate accommodation than bed-&-breakfast plan to offer more dignified and  hotels. Measures to prevent the expulsion of tenants  have been stepped up.  
  
 
 
 SOCIAL DIVERSITY 
  In order to promote social diversity, under the 2000  Solidarity and Urban Renewal Act municipalities with  more than 50,000 inhabitants must ensure that social  housing represents 20 to 25% of their housing stock. In addition, disadvantaged urban areas qualify for  measures to boost economic activity, such as social  security and tax exemptions for businesses in order to encourage employment. 
INNOVATIONS FOR SUSTAINABLE CITIES France has 19 eco-cities, 39 econeighbourhoods and nearly 400 positiveenergy territories for green growth which roll out exemplary practical, innovative and effective solutions for a new way of shaping the urban fabric. 16 consortia of businesses and regions have been awarded the title “Industrial 
Demonstrators for Sustainable Cities” in order to develop exemplary and innovative urban projects, benefiting from technical assistance from the government for five years and support from the Investment in the Future programme. The key features of these demonstrators are a small carbon footprint, energy self-sufficiency, the circular economy, water protection, the restoration of biodiversity, functional and social diversity and community involvement. 
BREATHABLE CITIES 
Under the “Breathable Cities in Five Years” initiative, France is helping 20 local authorities for a five-year period with funding of up to €1 million per action and grants for the purchase of clean vehicles. 
URBAN POLICY 
The government has earmarked €40 billion under its social and urban development policy to finance renovation of the most run-down neighbourhoods.  

France, with 187 other countries, is committed to implementing the 
DISASTER RISK REDUCTION FRAMEWORK adopted at Sendai (Japan) in 
March 2015. Through the CREWS initiative, it has contributed to the establishment of forecasting and early warning systems for extreme climatic events. 
 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 	Improve application of the “prevent, reduce, offset” principle to reduce waste and optimise waste management 
 	Develop a circular economy, promote the sparing use of resources and encourage short supply chains  	Strengthen responsible production and consumption 
 	Strengthen responsible consumption by increasing product information and raising awareness among the public 
 Internationally, encourage initiatives to support social entrepreneurship and encourage businesses to introduce  solidarity economy programmes 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
Consumption of materials in France amounted to 12 tonnes per inhabitant in 2012 In France, the (SOeS). In order to reduce circular economy is pollution and the abstraction estimated to of resources, it is necessary to contribute 500,000 change modes of production, jobs and consumption, sorting and recycling. In order to do so   2.5% of GDP  France, which has considerable Club of Rome advantages in the sphere of innovation, is rolling out the 
eco-design of goods and services. That means making maximum use of renewable resources and recovering waste through reuse, repair and recycling. The government supports this movement by encouraging players to provide information about the environmental impacts of their products. Consumers also play a key role 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
The production and consumption model which has underpinned the prosperity of the developed world since the 19th century and now drives global growth also accentuates global imbalances. 
France pays attention to the pressures exerted on natural resources, which constitute the essential control system that regulates life on our planet. 
France participates in waste recovery and recycling and helps to strengthen the capacities of public authorities in both environmental and economic terms. AFD has supported more than thirty projects over the last 15 through their purchasing choices and by reducing their consumption. Public bodies and agencies are committed to exemplary behaviour, especially through public procurement. All economic players are taking part in the emergence of new collaborative models, whether through the sharing economy or through functionality (sale of the use of a good rather than the good itself), without jeopardising social benefits. 
Through legislation and a national plan, the government also supports fair trade which respects human rights and the environment. 
In 2014, the household waste recycling rate was 39% (recycling 22% and composting 17%), 
9% more than in 2011  SOeS 
years, mostly in Africa and with local authorities. Addis Ababa receives support for the creation of waste storage and sorting centres. The French Global Environment Facility (FFEM) is involved in the recycling of organic materials (Africompost in Benin in 2013) and in the recycling of plastic waste and electronic components. 
Upstream, transforming consumption modes also means educating and informing consumers. AFD carries out research into the feasibility, effectiveness, governance and fairness of certification models in developing countries. 
 
 
 	153 “ZERO WASTE” TERRITORIES 
 The government supports local authorities that  volunteer to take part in an exemplary and participatory initiative to promote the circular  economy with the aim of reducing the amount of  waste by 1 million tonnes in three years and saving PLANNED OBSOLENCE, a technique for deliberately shortening the lifetime of a product in order to increase the replacement rate, has been an offence since the 2015 Energy 

 	€63 million.  
 
 
 
 
 ENVIRONMENTAL LABELLING  provides consumers with  quantified, clear and objective information about a product’s  environmental impacts. That  transparency helps consumers to  make better-informed and perhaps more responsible  choices. It also encourages  better eco-design. 
 
 
 
 
Transition for Green Growth Act. 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (CSR) 
France introduced an environmental and social reporting requirement for companies in 2012. To that end, the national platform for joint action on CSR provides  a forum where all the stakeholders (economic players, trade unions, non-profit organisations, politicians and experts) can discuss the issues and make proposals. 
Business federations have also developed resources such as studies, guides and training to encourage their members to embrace CSR. 
 

 France is a participant in the 10-YEAR FRAMEWORK PLAN (10YFP) FOR ACTION ON 
 
        SUSTAINABLE CONSUMPTION AND  PRODUCTION adopted at Rio+20 and co steers the sustainable tourism programme with  the World Tourism Organisation. 
 
 
 
 
 	AGRO-ECOLOGY IN MADAGASCAR 
 In agriculture, agro-ecology proposes models which conserve natural resources while being highly productive. 
 France is helping Madagascar with a project to enhance watersheds and irrigated areas which takes account of training in agro-ecological farming techniques, the provision of appropriate equipment and the improvement of downstream production chains. 
 
GUIDELINES 

 
 Keep global warming well below 2° C or even 1.5° C by rolling out short- and long-term emissions strategies that drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
 	Incorporate adaptation to climate change into public action and anticipate risks (prevention) 
 	Step up efforts to increase energy efficiency and the share of renewables in the energy mix, and step up carbon sinks. 
 	Invest in international cooperation and research and disseminate information in order to mobilise players  
 	Support developing countries in their transition to low-carbon economies 
 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
France mobilised all its capacities to host the Conference of Parties to the United Nations Framework Agreement on Climate Change, which culminated in December 2015 in the first universal agreement on climate change. Amongst other measures, it adopted the Energy Transition for Green Growth Act, which aims to develop a low-carbon economy with the ambitious objective of reducing emissions by 40% by 2030 in relation to the 1990 level. In order to achieve this goal, the government is encouraging the development of renewable energy sources and reducing France’s nuclear power base. In order to encourage all players to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions, since 2014 the polluter-pays principle has been applied through the climate energy contribution, a tax on all emissions generated by the use 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
France has long been a contributor to the work of the Intergovernmental Group on Climate Change (IGCC) to raise awareness of and anticipate climate change. It is committed to devoting an addition €2 billion a year between now and 2020 to the fight against climate change. €21 billion have been dedicated to development and climate-related projects since 2006, representing more than half (56%) of the financing made available by AFD to its partners. The proportion of financing allocated to mitigation between 2013 and 2015 will have resulted in a reduction of 11.4 million tonnes of C02 a year. 
In addition, France recognises the priority given to Africa for access to energy and the development of of fossil fuels, the revenue from which helps to finance the tax credit for competitiveness and employment. In 2013, France produced 0.9% of global greenhouse gas emissions while accounting for 3.5% of global GDP, making it one of the least intensive countries in terms of greenhouse gas emissions. Most emissions are generated by the transport, residential, commercial, farming and industrial 	sectors. 	Emissions 	linked 	to 	household consumption 	remain 
Greenhouse gas emissions 	high, 	given 	the greenhouse 	gas 
in France fell by 11% emissions generated by between 1990 and 2013  the production of 
	SOeS 	imported goods. 
renewable energies in the context of the fight against climate change in order to support African governments wishing to set out on the road towards a development model that is low in greenhouse gas emissions and resilient to the impacts of climate change. In pursuit of that objective, it supports the initiative on renewable energies in Africa launched by African heads of state at the COP 21 climate conference.  
Through a facility set up by AFD and Expertise France, France helped some developing African countries and small island states to draw up intended nationally determined contributions so that they could take part in the process which culminated in the Paris Agreement at the COP 21 climate conference. 
    THE FRENCH INITIATIVE FOR CORAL REEFS (IFRECOR)  includes the issue of climate change in 
     French overseas territories in its programme of work. Amongst other things, it has set up a   network of observatories of the effects of  climate change on coral reefs, published a guide on coastal development for decision-
 takers and estimated the value of coastal  protection services rendered by coral reefs at  €515 million a year.  
 
 
 	Climate 	change 	is 	central 	to 	France’s 
 INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AID policy,  expressed in support for geothermal energy in 
 Ethiopia and Kenya, the protection of coral reefs in the Comores, the improvement of  sustainable transport in the Philippines and  waste management in Polynesia. 
 
 
 
 THE COP 21 LABELLING SCHEMES recognise  projects and initiatives which combat climate change, innovate, mobilise and have an  international dimension. To date, 160 local  authorities, 203 non-profit organisations, 113  economic players and 90 educational or research institutions have been awarded COP 
 	21 labels. 
 
 
 
 	ENERGY TRANSITION FOR GREEN GROWTH ACT (2015) VOLUNTARY COMMITMENTS 
Economic players are committing to the fight against climate change, especially in the transport sector through the Objective CO2 charter for the road transport industry and the road builders’ convention on voluntary commitments to conserve nonrenewable resources and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
THE CLIMATE ENERGY CONTRIBUTION was introduced into the French tax system as an incentive to reduce fuel consumption and polluting emissions by making the largest emitters pay. A pathway has been defined, rising from €22/tonne in 2016 to €100/tonne by 2030, and a carbon floor price for electricity will be imposed in 2017.  
CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION PLAN (2011-2015) 
Framed after extensive consultation, the plan takes account of the impacts of climate change in all spheres and contains recommendations in areas such as biodiversity, agriculture, water, urban planning, health, natural risks, energy, industry and infrastructure, etc. French overseas territories will be included in the revision of the plan in 2016. 

    Drawn up after a national debate, the Energy Transition Act affects all sectors of activity. In particular, it  promotes the development of low-carbon transport, the insulation of homes and renewable energies.  Planning tools and initiatives such as local climate-air-energy plans are available to local authorities in  order to implement the Act. Businesses and investors are encouraged to evaluate their impact on the climate and to move towards low-carbon projects. 
 
 
ACTION AGENDA 
France, alongside Peru, Morocco and the United Nations, has played a leading role in the mobilisation on an unparalleled scale of all players in civil society – businesses, local authorities, foundations and NGOs – in the framework of the Lima-Paris Action Agenda. It now brings together over 10,000 players from over 180 countries, either individually or collectively within 70 international and multi-partner coalitions. The Paris Decision hails its achievements and highlights this unprecedented initiative. France is continuing to actively support the movement in 2016 and is working alongside the Moroccan presidency of COP 22 as it gathers pace in order to ensure the persistence of an inclusive, transparent and sustainable spirit. 
 
 
STRATEGIC FOCUSES 

 
 	Combat all types of marine pollution in France and internationally,  
 Protect marine biodiversity, encourage the protection of biodiversity in the high seas at the international level and combat invasive species  
 	Ensure sustainable fishing and equitable sharing of economic resources, and combat overfishing 
 	Strike a balance between use of the oceans and coastal ecosystems 
 	Limit the impact of climate change on the oceans, including acidification 
 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 


 
IN FRANCE 
France possesses an exclusive economic zone of 11 million km², 97% of which lies in the overseas dependencies. This is the second-largest EEZ in the world, which gives France special responsibility in this domain.  France applies the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), the foundational document, updated in 2013, which closely links environmental protection and economic activities. However, it is important to pursue our efforts, particularly to combat overfishing and to achieve balanced use and reduce pollution.  
A bill, currently before parliament, on recovering biodiversity, nature and landscapes would enable the creation of functional fish areas for targeted, effective protection of species from all activities. Within the European Union institutions, France also supported the 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
More than three billion people depend on marine and coastal biodiversity for their livelihoods. Oceans absorb about 30% of carbon dioxide produced by humans, 30% of global fish stocks are overexploited, the acidity of the oceans has increased threefold since the beginning of the industrial revolution. And climate change continues to 	degrade 	natural 	marine 	environments 	and biodiversity. France is improving regional capacity to preserve biodiversity and adapt to climate change, in particular in the Pacific islands through pilot projects in Fiji, New Caledonia, French Polynesia and Vanuatu. The ban on trawling at depths greater than 800 metres, which led to an agreement on 30 June 2016. 
The French navy is doing its part to control risks related to maritime activities, to enforce 
France has: 	the 	law, 	to 	combat pollution, and to monitor 
10 of the world's 	and 	safeguard 	protected and vulnerable species.  
coral reefs, 20% of 	Furthermore, the regional the world's atolls, and  	consistency 	plans 	(SCOT) aim between 2020-2030 to 6% of the world's 	keep one-third of shores as seamounts. 	wilderness. 
approach comprises a social dimension by involving local communities in risk management.  
The FAO Agreement on Port State Measures has been ratified by 24 contracting parties, including France. As soon as a 25th signatory ratifies the agreement, the PSM will become operational. The agreement contributes significantly to efforts to combat illegal fishing, through coordination and cooperation measures on port state controls to eliminate this particularly harmful type of fishing. 
 
 	PROTECTED MARINE AREAS 
 France has seven national marine parks and another three are planned (the Corsica Cape, Martinique and the  Normandy-Brittany Gulf). In 2016 it will surpass its target of  protecting 20% of its marine area after it designates the  protected marine area of New Caledonia and extends the natural reserve of the French Southern Lands by an 
 	area equal to mainland France. 
 
 
 
 	BIODIVERSITY 	COMBATING POLLUTION 
 	Under the National 	To 	tackle 	marine 
 	Biodiversity 	pollution and nutrients, France has from 	rubbish 
	Strategy 	(2011-
 2020), France undertaken to limit the  undertakes by 2020 impact of activities: 
 to sustainably reducing nitrates near manage and coastal areas,  harvest all stocks of particularly to combat  fish, aquatic the proliferation of green  invertebrates and algae, and a ban on plants, and to disposable plastic bags 
 	control 	illegal 	and tableware.   	fishing. 
 
 
 
 	BLUE GROWTH 
PROTECTION OF THE SEA  
France has declared an immediate moratorium on oil and gas prospecting in the Mediterranean, in its territorial waters and exclusive economic zone. France will request the extension of the moratorium to the whole of the Mediterranean under the Barcelona Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea Against 
Pollution.  
 
NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR THE SEA AND 
Through the FRENCH FACILITY FOR GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT THE COAST (SNML) is a strategy paper for the protection of the environment, successful stewardship of marine resources and integrated, concerted management of activities relating to the sea and the coast. It contains a long-term vision of the integrated policy on the sea and the coast. 

 Research and investment in  renewable marine energy are  booming with the support of Future Investments. The "SME  biodiversity 2015" programme  supports projects like Écocean,  which protects vulnerable biodiversity in ports, and Saclaf  SMF, which detects submarine  biotopes. 
 
 
(FFEM), France supports capacity-building by funding the participation of post-doctoral researchers from developing countries in the Tara Oceans project. The experience will build their capacity for intervention by enhancing their knowledge of marine ecosystems, expand international cooperation in this area, and support better inclusion of these ecosystems in governance of the high seas. 

Following on from the initiative of France, Monaco and Tunisia to promote MARINE PROTECTED AREAS (MPA), the Association for Sustainable Financing of Mediterranean MPAs, chaired by France, currently has nine members. France is also committed to promoting blue growth in Africa through a structural partnership signed in 2016 with the World Bank, which will provide $1 billion for the establishment of an observatory dedicated to the prevention and management of coastal risks. 
 	PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE SUSTAINABLE USE 
 	OF TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS, 
 	SUSTAINABLY MANAGE FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION,  
 	HALT AND REVERSE LAND DEGRADATION  	AND HALT BIODIVERSITY LOSS 
 
STRATEGIC FOCUSES 

 
 	Preserve terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems  
 	Protect biodiversity, combat trafficking of protected species and combat invasive species 
 	Manage the extension of artificial land cover and the degradation of soils and the natural environment  	Share the benefits of genetic resources from nature 
 	Strengthen the link between economic development and protection of biodiversity 
 	Promote the sustainable development of land and ecosystems at the international level through a territories approach  
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
In 2015, 160,612 species (faunal, floral, fungal, terrestrial 9.3% of France's total land area in 2014 (SOeS). The bill on and marine) have been identified, with figures constantly recovering biodiversity, nature and landscapes provides changing in line with new discoveries (Museum National for the establishment of a French Biodiversity Agency, for d’Histoire Naturelle). Those numbers confirm the wealth a ban on the patentability of plants and animals from of biodiversity in France and its overseas biological processes, and for farmers' rights dependencies, but also its vulnerability. In 2014, artificial land to exchange seedlings and seeds. The bill Some 1,260 of the world's extinct or cover accounted for emphasises the services rendered by endangered species are present in at least biodiversity. The French Ministry of the one French territory. However, 9.3% of France's Interior, together with the Central Office increasingly fragmented territories are total land area for the Protection of the Environment and restricting migration, feeding and INSEE Public Health and the National Hunting and 

reproduction for many species. Taking an 
ecosystem-based approach and combating the degradation of ecosystems seems vital to preservation of biodiversity, given that artificial land cover accounted for 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
Almost 5,000 researchers in France are involved in research on biodiversity, some of them participating in the scientific and political Inter-governmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES). 
France was the first country to make sustainable development reporting a legal requirement for large companies in 2001, extended in 2015 to investors under the Energy Transition Act. The Act on Development and International Solidarity Policy of 7 July 2014 compels both public and private actors to incorporate social responsibility criteria into aid provision and implementation. The AFD group recognises SR as an Wildlife 	Office, 	combats 	trafficking 	of protected species; investigations are underway into trafficking of ivory, tropical wood, elvers and birds. 
 
essential factor in the development and implementation of the projects it funds and bases its selections on various rules and directives produced by international organisations as well as international industry best practices, such as those published by major industry organisations. 
 
France supports the action of the United Nations Global Compact and represents the world's second-largest network. Global Compact France is involved in tackling climate change and worked for a successful outcome at COP21 in Paris; it is now working with public bodies to contribute to achieving the SDGs. 


 
 
 	REDUCTION IN THE USE OF PESTICIDES  
            The use of phytosanitary products increased  by 5% per year on average between 2009  and 2013 (MAAF/SSP). The Ecophyto 2 plan  renews the commitment to halve their use by 
               2025, by encouraging agro-ecological  practices and by issuing low-pesticide  certificates to encourage distributors to act.  
 	 
 
 
 France has signed the NAGOYA PROTOCOL on  Access to Genetic Resources and Fair and 
 	Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their 
Utilisation.  
 
 
 
 
 PROTECTION OF ECOSYSTEMSFrance is implementing  programmes to  protect its natural heritage and is extending  protected areas, which cover more than 34% of total land area (SOeS).  
Green and blue corridors create an ecological network for the movement of various species. 
 
 	PROMOTE PEACEFUL AND INCLUSIVE SOCIETIES  	FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT,  
 	PROVIDE ACCESS TO JUSTICE FOR ALL AND BUILD EFFECTIVE,  	ACCOUNTABLE AND INCLUSIVE INSTITUTIONS AT ALL LEVELS 
 
 
STRATEGIC FOCUSES 

 
 	Ensure the rule of law guaranteeing respect for fundamental freedoms and access to information  	Expand citizen participation and ensure exemplary institutions and administrations  
 	Combat all forms of violence and ensure effective justice 
 	Combat all forms of organised crime and illegal flows 
 	Pursue the commitment to the universal abolition of the death penalty  	Combat human trafficking at international level 
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 

 
IN FRANCE 
In the international arena, France is playing its part in drive to strengthen citizens' rights. The bill on peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations under United transparency, anti-corruption and economic Nations mandates, as a permanent member of the modernisation provides for the establishment of a 
Security Council. national anti-corruption agency and funded legal On the rule of law, since 2010, priority In 2014, almost protection for whistle-blowers and their preliminary rulings on constitutionality protection in the finance sector.  
(QPC) entitle any person involved in legal 900,000 The terrorist threat has increased considerably proceedings to apply, subject to certain people benefited in France since 2015, which triggered a higher conditions, to the Constitutional Court to from legal aid  Vigipirate anti-terrorism alert level, the determine whether a legal provision Key Figures, justice declaration of a state of emergency and the infringes rights and freedoms guaranteed system 2015 implementation of the combined forces' by the French Constitution. The Rights Operational Sentinel with around-the-clock Defender, an independent institution protection of seaports and airports and the whose role is to defend people whose rights are infringed deployment of 10,000 soldiers to support the police and to ensure equal access to justice, is part of the same forces. 
 
INTERNATIONALLY 
Strengthening the rule of law and the protection of recruited and exploited by traffickers worldwide. France is vulnerable populations are central to the work of working with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime France's Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International (UNODC) and is committed to national capacity-building Development. France is supporting Tunisian civil society and consolidating cross-border cooperation mechanisms and the Tunisian government in a process to strengthen between the Gulf of Guinea countries. 
guarantees for the protection of human rights and On the ground and in international forums, France is freedoms. France is striving to strengthen the capacities working to ensure greater compliance with international of Tunisia's senior civil servants, new independent humanitarian law and protection of civilians. While crises national bodies, journalists and human rights defenders are generating new humanitarian needs every day and and improve dialogue and interactions between them. more than 60 million people worldwide have been forced France's commitment to the universal abolition of the to flee their homes, at the recent conference in Istanbul death penalty is determined and steadfast; it remains a France reasserted its commitment to protecting civilians human rights priority. France is involved in the fight and strengthening the continuum between humanitarian against human trafficking. Every year more than aid and development. 
2.5 million victims, mainly women and children, are 

 	ACCESS TO INFORMATION  
 According to a UN study, in 2014, France was ranked  number one in the world for  online access to information   through the website service-public.fr  
 
 
 
 
 CRIME PREVENTION  The national crime  prevention strategy (2013-2017) contains actions for  youth exposed to crime, as  well as to improve  prevention against women, of violence and to  improve law and order.   80 priority crime prevention  areas have been established with increased  collaboration between the  police, the prosecutor's  office, the gendarmerie, and the administrative and 
 	tax services.  
 	The Act to Prevent and 
 	Tackle Anti-Social Behaviour, 
	Public 	Disturbances 	and 
 Terrorist Acts in Public  Transport (22 March 2016)  has reinforced existing provisions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To combat fraud, France's High Authority for TRANSPARENCY IN PUBLIC LIFE audits and publishes public figures' declarations of assets and interests. 
JUSTICE  
"21st Century Justice" is a reform under way in France. The aim is to facilitate access to rights by establishing a single reception service for litigants and by simplifying procedures. It also favours alternative dispute settlement mechanisms. 
CONFLICT PREVENTION 
The French armed forces are contributing to conflict prevention and optimising the interaction between troops and the civilian environment in terms of security, governance, health, justice, freedom 	and 	economic 	sufficiency 	in international theatres of operations. 

 	STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 	AND REVITALISE THE GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP 
 
 	FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
STRATEGIC FOCUSES 

 
 Mobilise additional financial resources for sustainable development: strengthen domestic resource mobilisation, increase international development assistance, and facilitate the implementation of investment promotion regimes for the least developed countries 
	 	Assist countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability 
	 	Improve access to and dissemination of technology through the Technology Facilitation Mechanism 
	 	Support capacity-building initiatives in developing countries 
	 	Promote the data revolution to monitor implementation of the 2030 Agenda  
 
ISSUES AND ACTIONS 
 
 
SDG 17 is concerned with the financial and other resources needed to achieve the other 16 goals. The Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA) describes the renewed global partnership for sustainable development and defines the overall framework for the implementation of the agenda. Its seven action areas cover the five themes that make up SDG 17. The AAAA is incorporated into the 2030 Agenda, of which, alongside the 17 SDGs, it represents the 
"implementation" side. 
France is involved in this renewed, relevant framework of implementing resources for the agenda. France's first Act on Development and International Solidarity Policy anticipated the new international framework defined in 2015 by stressing the need to take the economic, social and environmental components of sustainable development into account simultaneously, and by emphasising the role and complementarity of all public and private stakeholders. The act highlights the need to tailor the instruments and modes of intervention in accordance with the needs of each country, with official development assistance (ODA) acting as a catalyst for multiple sources of financing, where the potential for raising tax revenue and access to financial markets are limited and insufficient. 
 
Domestic resource mobilisation: France is assisting developing countries in reforming their tax systems. As well as the Addis Tax Initiative, whose main aim is to increase the technical assistance provided to developing countries, France is strongly involved in international initiatives such as Tax Inspectors Without Borders and the OECD's inclusive framework for the implementation of the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting  (BEPS) project. 
 
Technology: France was strongly involved in setting up the Technology Facilitation Mechanism and pursued advocacy work at the first annual Multi-Stakeholder Forum on Science, Technology and Innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals in June 2016.  
Data: France is involved in the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data and the Open Government Partnership, which it will co-chair from the end of 2016. France also supports a centre of excellence in statistics in Africa by contributing to the Economic and Statistic Observatory for Sub-Saharan Africa, AFRISTAT, and by assisting three Africa statistics schools. France has adopted a new digital development action plan. 
 
Trade: France is fully committed to the review of the EU's trade and investment policy to better reflect a changing environment and ensure the implementation of the commitments made in 2015.  
 
EITI: France has supported the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) since 2005, in particular its implementation in 14 French-speaking countries. At the G8 Summit in June 2013, France committed to joining the initiative. That commitment, which appears in France's first national action plan for the Open Government Partnership, complements the French government's interest in developing responsible mining in French Guiana and in promoting the mining sector in metropolitan France. France began preparing its application for EITI membership in March 2016.  
 
"Innovating Together" strategy: France's Ministry for Foreign Affairs and International Development has approved the "Innovating Together" strategy, which promotes and encourages businesses to go beyond CSR. The strategy includes 16 proposals for social and inclusive economy and entrepreneurship initiatives in development policies and stresses the need to work in stakeholder coalitions.  

 
Policy coherence: France has made development policy coherence a priority of its development and international solidarity policy under the Act of 7 July 2014. The action of French development policy operators is guided by a number of principles, including gender, social and environmental dimensions, and fair trade. 
 
Finance: France has incorporated the broader, modern vision of development financing promoted by the AAAA, with a renewed collective commitment to ODA, in particular for the LDCs. French public financing for international development in the form of loans will increase by €4 billion between now and 2020, of which half, i.e. €2 billion, will be dedicated to the climate. There will also be a €400 million increase on current levels in donations between now and 2020. France is conducting a pilot study of the new Total Official Support for Sustainable Development (TOSSD) indicator. 
 
Debt: In international negotiations on financing for development, France promotes compliance with principles of sustainable financing as well as improved technical assistance for the countries concerned. France chairs the Paris Club - a coordination forum for sovereign creditors - and bases its lending policy on assessments by international financial institutions. 
 
Domestic resource mobilisation: An inter-ministerial discussion platform has been established to improve the coordination and effectiveness of actions by French agencies in this area. 
  
 	LIMA-PARIS ACTION AGENDA: 
 France is working to strengthen the global partnership for sustainable development, in  particular through the LIMA-PARIS ACTION  AGENDA where, with Peru and now also 
 Morocco, it has helped connect some 10,000 stakeholders from more than 180 countries in 70 international multi-stakeholder coalitions. 
 
 
 
Trade: France firmly believes that trade, if supported by adequate policies, can help drive development. It is vital to include developing countries, especially the LDCs, more fully in international trade. France places great importance on the Aid for Trade initiative and intends to continue its support. France pledged €1.96 billion to Aid for Trade in 2014.   
 
Capacity-building: The reform of France's technical cooperation system, with the establishment of Expertise France, has strengthened the means of action for capacitybuilding in our partner countries by improving the effectiveness, relevance and speed of our interventions. France can respond more effectively to our partners' demand for capacity-building. Expertise France contributes fully to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs. France has also decided to give AFD responsibility for promoting capacity-building in governance, in partnership with Expertise France.  
 
Co-benefits: In 2014, AFD set an ambitious target of 50% financing with climate co-benefits. The agency surpassed that target in 2015. 
 
Systemic issues: A strategic alliance between France's international development agency, AFD, and its public investment agency, Caisse des Dépôts et Consignations (CDC), will enable strategic and operational synergies between the two institutions that will benefit sustainable development. 
 
MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AAAA AND THE 17 
SDGS  
Implementation of the AAAA is evaluated annually at the ECOSOC forum on financing for development. At the forum, progress on all implementing resources for the 2030 Agenda, i.e. the 17 SDGs, will be addressed. The conclusions and recommendations issued at the annual forum are submitted to the High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development to contribute to the global monitoring of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
 

THE THIRD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT took place in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) in July 2015, ahead of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda 2030 and the 17 SDGs. At the end of the conference, the member states of the United Nations adopted the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA), which describes the renewed global partnership for sustainable development. The document contains commitments, guidelines and policy recommendations on financing for sustainable development and defines the framework for the implementation of the SDGs. It sends a strong message about the importance of the climate and its inclusion in all development policies, and endorses a broad, modern, diversified vision of financing for development by anchoring it in sustainability. The AAAA was a milestone on the path to the adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement. 
New wealth indicators 

 
 
 
France is strongly involved in the process to define global indicators to monitor the sustainable development goals, which will be formally endorsed soon at the United Nations. France's National Institute of Statistics and Economic Research (INSEE) is already conducting a feasibility study of their production across all of the statistical departments of the French government ministries. In the short or medium term, the public statistics service should have the capacity to produce slightly more than half of the indicators (a definition is expected or close). The indicators will be able to be transposed nationally. 
In parallel, in line with the goal of developing alternative indicators to gross domestic product, France has adopted ten new wealth indicators, pursuant to the under the Act of 13 April 2015 on the Use of New Wealth Indicators in Public Policy Design. The indicators should be taken into account in the design of public policies to ensure better measures of progress.  
Defined after a citizen consultation organised by France Stratégie in spring 2015, the new indicators cover employment, investment, national debt, health, inequality, education, environmental protection, and perceived well-being.  
In accordance with the act, "the government shall submit annually to parliament, on the first Tuesday of October, a report on previous trends in the new wealth indicators, such as indicators of inequality, quality of life and sustainable development, as well as a qualitative or quantitative assessment of the impact of key reforms implemented in the previous year and the current year and those planned for the next year (...) based on those indicators and on gross domestic product (...)". The indicators, which reflect the goals of the 2030 Agenda, are consistent with the national reform programme, the French version of the European Commission's "Europe 2020" strategy for smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. 






	 	- 4 - 

	 	- 4 - 

	 	- 4 - 





 
11 

 
11 



 
11 



 

 	16 

 	16 

 





 



 	16 



 	16 



 

 	16 

 	16 



 	16 





 	16 

 	16 



 	16 



 
 
  
 

 	16 

 	16 



 	16 





 	16 





 	16 













