INTRODUCTION


The transformation of Mauritius l from a low-income mono-crop agricultural economy to an upper middle income economy has not been without challenges.
Political stability, strong institutions, the upholding of rule of law, democratic principles, a thriving business environment combined with effective use of preferential trade agreements and membership in regional groupings have all been instrumental in driving growth and facilitating economic diversification.
The approach to development has always been inclusive with a model where economic progress is buttressed by social measures that benefit the population at large. The welfare state and the high rating of Mauritius on both the United
Nations Human Development Index1 and the Social Progress Index3 have been testimony to this.
Mauritius is wholly committed to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We were actively engaged in negotiations that led to the adoption of the post-2015 framework, drawing from experience gathered through the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
We view the SDGs as a continuum of the significant progress made in building an inclusive and sustainable Mauritius under the MDGs. Mauritius fared well on the MDGs by meeting the established goals on poverty, education, health, gender and global partnership. We did less well on the challenges relating to Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), reducing child mortality, the protection and conservation of the terrestrial and marine environments.
This experience has been critical in taking forward the implementation of the SDGs. The approach is a consultative one bringing together all stakeholders who remain committed to delivering on the goals.
In keeping with our national priorities, the Report focuses on SDGI: No Poverty, SDG4: Quality Education, SDG13: Climate Action and SDG14: Life Below Water.
No Goal has been neglected. We have achieved SDG3: Good Health and Well Being and SDG17: Partnerships for the Goals. The other SDGs are on track. Particular attention is needed to be able to achieve SDG14: Life Below water. To advance on the goal we will require strong partnership with real on the ground experience on the issue.
The Report advocates the establishment of a permanent mechanism to track the SDGs and identify support required for the achievement of the SDGs. The United Nations will remain a key partner for us to move forward concretely and rapidly towards the achievement of the SDGs.



I The Republic of Mauritius comprises the Islands of Mauritius, Rodrigues, Agalega, Tromelin and other Outer Islands including the Chagos Archipelago & Diego Garcia.

PREPARING THE REVIEW: METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS


Building on the momentum of the MDGs, our Roadmap for the implementation of the SDGs, our obligations under the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway and the Agenda 2063 of the African Union, we pursued an integrated and inclusive approach in the development of our first VNR Report.	
We used existing arrangements to facilitate and accelerate the VNR process. In 2018, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and International Trade (MFARIIT) was assigned the responsibility to coordinate, monitor and report on the implementation of the SDGs. The MFARIIT also chairs the SDG Steering Committee, where the public sector, private stakeholders, Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) and academia are represented through their designated SDG focal points.
Therefore, for the purpose of our first VNR Report, we established a core VNR drafting team within the MFARIIT and worked in close collaboration with SDG focal points and members of the SDG Steering Committee, which acted as our bridge to various other institutions falling under their purview. Also, given that the SDGs are crosscutting, we identified Ministries to co-lead with MFARIIT on the development of each SDG chapter.
INCLUSIVENESS AND STAKEHOLDER PARTICIPATION
We also developed a Stakeholder Engagement Plan as well as an SDG Communications Strategy to ensure inclusiveness and a multi-stakeholder participation in the process. For this, we set out an SDG Questionnaire with specific questions and rigorous criteria to gather information. This constituted a solid basis for the development of each SDG chapter. We also conducted an initial data analysis and policy assessment.
Box 1: Writing the ReportA Collaborative ApproachWe view the VNR as an opportunity to create momentum and ownership for the implementation of the SDGs in an inclusive and transparent manner. As part of our Communications Strategy and to reach out and connect with a wider section of the population and development partners, we uploaded the drafts of each SDG chapters on MFARlIT's website. We launched a communication campaign via local newspapers and radio inviting all parties to come together in developing our VNR Report. Organisations involved in national and oneto-one consultations, including the United Nations Country Team to Mauritius, were specifically prompted to provide comments and inputs. We received meaningful feedback.

Broad and wide national consultations and workshops as well as one-to-one dialogues were held from November 2018 to June 201 9 involving both public and private stakeholders, Civil Society, NGOs, academia, human rights organisations in mainland Mauritius as well as Rodrigues and the Outer Islands.
In particular, we requested lead Ministries to consult with their respective stakeholders, including public departments, parastatal bodies, local institutions, private sector partners and NGOs. These organisations were also present during the various fine-tuning exercises conducted by the core VNR team. We requested lead Ministries to inform and involve their respective Ministers in the process.
We held validation workshops with a cross-section of stakeholders. We also engaged in specific consultations and working sessions with the Mauritius Council of Social Services (MACOSS), the umbrella group for NGOs in Mauritius as well as its members.
Part of the core VNR team also visited Rodrigues. All 1 7 SDGs were discussed with the people of Rodrigues. We also engaged with members of Rodrigues Regional Assembly (RRA), all the Commissions, the Rodrigues Council for Social Services (RCSS), the umbrella organisation of NGOs in Rodrigues and other specific NGOs.
We also worked in close collaboration with the private sector, including Business Mauritius, an independent association of more than 1,200 local businesses, and AfrAsia Bank, as Chairperson of the UN Global Compact Network Mauritius. In addition, the Report itself is being partly sponsored by the Mauritius Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI), which is one of the main voices of the Mauritian business community.
A list of consulted organisations and contributors is included at Annex Il.
As a country, we also leveraged all available opportunities for peer learning. As well as reaching out to the United Nations Development on Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) to conduct VNR Missions in November 2018 and January 2019, Mauritius also attended VNR related workshops in Geneva, Incheon and Addis Ababa in 201 8, as well as in Bonn in 2019.
Our process was also informed by workshops held in connection with the SAMOA Pathway and the African Union (AU) Agenda 2063.
This experience enabled us to develop comprehensive criteria against which our VNR Report was written. We would like this Report to be a multi-purpose tool, for communication purposes within Mauritius as well as a tool to seek collaboration and partnerships with other countries and address challenges we face in the day-to-day implementation of the SDGs. We also anticipate that our Report would provide an evidence-based framework to showcase our experiences as a peer-learning dimension.
08 eaasp
DATA MONITORING
Mauritius is deemed to have strong data collection capacity. We adhere to the International Monetary Fund (IMF Ys Special Data Dissemination Standard (SDDS), a global benchmark for disseminating macroeconomic data.
Statistics Mauritius, the main provider of official statistics in Mauritius, took the lead to work in close collaboration with line Ministries, Departments and Organisations to compile relevant SDG indicators. We constructed a first SDG Database for Mauritius in 201 6. As at October 2018, 72 percent of the data was available.
Of the 232 UN-prescribed SDG indicators, 222 were found to be relevant for Mauritius. Of these, data are available on 1 59 indicators, including proxies.
Figure 1: SDG Indicators
Source: Statistics Mauritius

SDG PROGRESS TRACKER
We have investigated the number of indicators which are relevant to Mauritius.
Thereafter, an assessment was made, both quantitative and qualitative, to determine our progress on each indicator. Ministries, Departments and other stakeholders defined the current policy stance that we are working towards at the moment.
We also set a Performance baseline on each indicator to determine whether we are on track, have achieved that particular indicator or we are at risk of not being able to achieve our objective.
An SDG Progress Tracker providing a high-level snapshot for each Goal is at Annex l.
The assessment was made based on the following three broad criteria.
Box 2: Criteria for SDG 	Progress Tracker
ACHIEVED
•All relevant targets are achieved (75 percent and above)
ON TRACK• Enabling policy and legal framework are in place
• Resources are available
• Implementation of intervention(s) is underway
• Current progress is good and on a positive trajectory
• Enabling policies and legal framework are not in place
•Absence of concrete implementation of intervention(s)
• Resources are not available
• Limited or no notable progress
09
caw

POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMENT


CREATING OWNERSHIP OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
The transition from the MDGs to the SDGs in Mauritius has been seamless as we participated in the first-round of the post-201 5 consultations. These triggered national consultations, with participation of public-private stakeholders, the youth and elderly, academia, Civil Society and the public at large on how to achieve a sustainable and inclusive growth in our quest to become a highincome economy.
We engaged alongside the UN Resident Coordinator's Office in Mauritius, various other public institutions and NGOs in a series of awareness programmes, to popularise the concept of SDGs. In particular,
• On 28 September 201 5, we organised with the Ministry of Social Integration and Economic Empowerment and the UNDP, a Social Good Summit with focus on SDGI: No Poverty. It brought together several public and private sector stakeholders as well as representatives of NGOs and Civil Society.
• A working session was held on 1 9 November 2015 to raise awareness among Members of the National Assembly, including Ministers. It was an opportunity to promote ownership and leadership of parliamentarians over the 2030 Agenda, as well as to identify appropriate strategies and mechanisms for effective management of parliamentarians and key stakeholders in the national delivery and monitoring of the Agenda. We organised a similar awareness session for the RRA on 23 May 201 7.
• We held an awareness workshop on SDGs on 20 November 2015 whereby capacity of local media was enhanced for professional reporting on the SDGs. A related session, including with Civil Society, was also held in Rodrigues on 24 May
201 7.
• On the data front, in May 2016, Statistics Mauritius took the lead by organizing an awareness workshop on SDGs with all data producers and set up a Committee on SDGs to work on the development of a SDG database.
• On 17 June 2016, a Civil Society Workshop on Community Development-End Poverty was held. The World Health Organisation (WHO) hosted the Global Dialogue on the role of Non-State Actors in supporting Member States in their national efforts to tackle NCDs as part of the SDGs support to Mauritius.
• The Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development launched the publication entitled Basic Course on Sustainable Development on 02 June 2016.
• From 18 to 21 September 2018, we hosted the 24th Session of the Inter-governmental Committee of Experts (ICE) of Southern Africa. The focus was on the blue economy: opportunities and challenges in Southern Africa. Prospects for fostering inclusive industrialization and sustainable development in the region were considered.
THE MAURITIUS PRIVATE SECTOR:
INNOVATIVE LEADERSHIP
We have a very vibrant private sector. The sector regularly takes the lead in creating initiatives, including on implementing the SDGs that cut across economic, social and environmental dimensions.
It is now becoming common practice for Mauritian businesses to adopt sustainable practices in their day-to-day activities. The AfrAsia Bank took the lead by launching a local network regrouping Mauritian companies in partnership with the UN Global Compact.
In October 2018, recognising that businesses, as much as Government and Civil Society, have a responsibility to commit to sustainable development, the private sector organised its First Sustainability Summit4 dedicated to the corporate world.
The Summit, which saw the participation of some 200 professionals from across the globe, mobilised companies and stakeholders that would be active participants in the field of sustainable development to create an equitable and prosperous Mauritius. Presenters, from the business community (both local and regional), development partners including the Agence Franqaise de Développement (AFD), United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), World Health Organisation (WHO), International Organisation for Migration (IOM), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO), UN Global Compact, the European Union (EU), the academic community, amongst others shared their experiences on the SDGs in Mauritius and elsewhere.
The aim was to encourage the business community to engage in collaborative initiatives that would help achieve the SDGs in areas such as responsible business practices; new instruments for climate financing; social programs for sustainable communities, quality education and gender equality; and corporate social responsibility and inclusive leadership.
In addition, the UN Global Compact has been gathering data and reports on sustainability performance and progress from companies in Mauritius in sectors such as financial services, banks, media, software and technology, support services, tourism and diversified operations.
In parallel, Business Mauritius aims to be the unifying platform for integration and action on sustainable development. The main objective is to be the voice of Mauritian private companies, while delivering services that sustain the progress of businesses, local communities and the nation as a whole.
Business Mauritius has set up a Sustainability and Inclusive Growth Commission to work towards advocating the increased engagement of their members in community development. The Commission has developed initiatives relating to inclusive growth, waste management, energy transition, coastal preservation, smart agriculture, sustainable cities and communities and climate finance.
SDGs AND YOUTH
We organised a Youth Conference on Sustainable Development in collaboration with the Mauritius Commercial Bank (MCB), a local private bank, and the Rajiv Gandhi Science Centre. We also launched the Young Mauritians Plan for the Planet book/et5.
During the first phase, 1 00 students from 1 0 secondary schools, with the support of their teachers and mentors, examined the different SDGs to identify 4 priority themes per SDG. They then worked together to find solutions for each issue. A total of 1 07 clear, precise and realistic solutions, ranging from the problem of drugs abuse, road accidents, poverty, to education for all and pollution, were selected and included in the booklet.
We intend to extend the project to other schools as well as other countries during the second phase, with special focus on the implementation of recommendations made.


4
http://sustainabilitysummit.afrasiabank.com
5https://www.mcbgroup.com/en/news/story/2018-08-09-Young-Mauritians—Plan-for-the-Planet— 1 07-actions-for-a-sustainable-future

caw
Figure 2: Companies reporting the SDGs in Mauritius
67
78
8
9 9
10
1014 14
15
15
1566Goal 2: Zero Hunger
Goal 14: Life Below Water
Goal 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions
Goal 6: Clean Water and Sanitation
Goal 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities
Goal 7: Affordable and Clean Energy
Goal 17: Partnership for the Goals
Goal 9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure
Goal 10: Reduced Inequalities
Goal 12: Responsible Consumption and Production
Goal 15: Life on Land
Goal 1: No Poverty
Goal 4: Quality Education
Goal 3: Good Health and Well-Being
Goal 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth
Goal 13: Climate Action
Goal 5: Gender Equality20
		2	4	6	8	10	12	14	16	18	20
Source: UN Global Compact


LEAVING NO ONE BEHIND
Our perspective on leaving no one behind is centered on our extensive social protection system and the National Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Framework, which we developed in 2016. Our constitution guarantees fundamental rights to the individual and provides all citizens with the opportunity to fulfill their potential in life.
Thus, all segments of society, including children, youth, persons with disabilities, people living with HIV/AIDS, our elderly, as well as migrants and foreign workers, are provided with opportunities to lead decent, dignified and rewarding lives in a healthy environment.
The new National CSR Framework is the enabler that encourages the private sector to embark on initiatives to leave no one behind. As such, many private businesses have established Foundations (eg AfrAsia Bank Foundation, MCB Forward Foundation, ENL Foundation, Rogers Foundation) with the aim of addressing issues relating to poverty, while improving the living standards of beneficiaries and enhancing sustainability in their businesses and in the country in general.
On the regional front, we have a number of capacitybuilding initiatives. The grant of scholarships to Africa IS such an example. We have a number of agreements and participate in the establishment of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) that are meant to uplift our counter-parts in neighbouring countries to higher standards of living.
INCORPORATING SDGS AND CROSSCUTTING AGENDAS IN NATIONAL FRAMEWORKS
We formulated the Mauritius 2030 Development Model to set the country on a higher economic growth path, with shared prosperity and improved quality of life for our citizens while leaving no one behind.


Our development model is more inclusive and sustains progress in all aspects of life - extending beyond economic growth and high-income per capita to include social, cultural, infrastructural, institutional and environmental development. Our progress is measured against four metrics. the per capita Gross National Income (GNI) as measured by the World Bank; the Human Development Index (HDI) of the United Nations Development Programme; the headway we make on modernisation; the sustainability of our development and intergenerational fairness 6
Moreover, sectoral policy documents, the 3-Year Strategic Plans and annual Budget Speeches supplement and provide the necessary strategic policy orientation in the implementation of the SDGs.
In the present 2019/20 Budget exercise, Ministries, Departments and other public institutions have been requested to incorporate the relevant targets for monitoring progress towards achieving the SDGs. This aims at bringing in more clarity in terms of the integration of the SDGs in national policies.

Figure 3: Alignment of National Policies to SDGs
The Economy


In addition, close partnerships and collaboration between the private sector, government organisations, NGOs, academia are a hallmark of our society.

6 3 Year Strategic Plan, 2018/19 2020/2	Pursuing Our Transformative Journey


SAMOA PATHWAY
Mauritius is considered as an example in championing the cause of Small Island Developing States (SIDS). In view of the unique nature and inherent vulnerabilities, SIDS remain a special case for sustainable development. They are constrained in meeting the goals in all three dimensions of sustainable development due to limited financial resources, including overall decline in Official Development Assistance (ODA).
In 2005, Mauritius hosted the UN High-Level international meeting for SIDS where the Mauritius Strategy for Implementation (MSI) for the further implementation of the Barbados Programme of Action for the Sustainable Development of SIDS (BPOA) was adopted. The MSI framework, in line with the MDGs, has set forth actions and strategies to build our resilience as a SIDS.
Following the adoption of the SAMOA Pathway in September 2014, Mauritius complied with the requirements thereof. The SAMOA Pathway is in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. It calls for urgent and concrete actions to address the vulnerabilities of SIDS in a concerted manner. This would sustain the momentum realised by countries like Mauritius in the implementation of the SAMOA Pathway.
In 2018, Mauritius hosted the first of a series of three preparatory SIDS Regional Meetings for the Mid-Term Review of the SAMOA Pathway to be held in New York in September 2019. We provided a platform to assess all major commitments taken over the last few years through a SIDS lens, shared national priorities and developed a regional agenda in the implementation of the SAMOA Pathway. The Atlantic, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean, and South China Sea (AIMS) outcome document was then adopted.
As a country, we noted a lack of coordination and awareness hindering the implementation of the SAMOA Pathway. Collection of qualitative information was a greater challenge to us than collecting quantitative data. Existing information
was restricted to the public sector. Hence, comprehensive data was not readily available. We also identified poor enforcement in terms of legislation and a lack of impact assessment frameworks and feedback mechanisms.
AFRICAN UNION AGENDA 2063
In 201 6, Mauritius welcomed a Domestication Mission on the First Ten Year Implementation Plan (FTYIP) of the African Union's Agenda 2063.
In 201 7, we also submitted an Interim Report on the Implementation of Agenda 2063. The Report highlighted the measures Mauritius had taken to mainstream the core aspirations and goals of Agenda 2063 in its development framework. Of the twenty goals of the FTYIP, only Goal 9:
Continental Financial and Monetary Institutions are established and functional was not found to be strictly relevant to Mauritius as a small island. The other nineteen goals of the FTYIP of the Agenda 2063 have been integrated into our national development plans.
Moreover, in line with our development model and socio-economic transformation objectives, we signed in 201 7, a Host Country Agreement with the African Union Commission (AUC) and the African Union Foundation (AUF) 2 for the organisation of the inaugural African Economic Platform. The Platform has since been institutionalised as an annual event allowing African governments to engage business and academic sectors to close the gap between industry and education systems. Hence, this is expected to strengthen the links between all sectors and help reduce the skills mismatch, stop graduate unemployment and address shortages of engineers, agricultural scientists, biologists, geologists and a host of other skills.
Hosting the event will also provide the policy space for Africans across all sectors to set the agenda to further promote Africa's integration and development.
AFRICAN PEER REVIEW MECHANISM
Mauritius also acceded on a voluntary basis to the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), in 2003. The APRM is a self-monitoring mechanism in matters of good governance, closely related to SDG16. We have been peer reviewed in July 2010 and the Mauritius Country Report was officially handed over to us in December 201 3.
Moreover, we have finalised our first APRM Country Progress Report in January 2019. The Progress Report will be presented to the APRM as early as possible.
INTERLINKAGES
We recognise that all SDGs are interlinked and linked with the SAMOA Pathway and AU's Agenda 2063. These are aligned to our national development strategies and policies.
To that end, we have used best-fit reporting in developing the SDG chapters. Many of the frameworks, legislation, policies, schemes, agreements, commitments, targets and indicators outlined in the Report cut across multiple SDGs.
We have provided a snapshot of the interlinkages:


Figure 4: Interlinkages between the 17 SDGs
10 1112 13 1415161712345678910111314151617
The Next Steps and Way Forward Chapter of the Report looks at these interlinkages and identifies trade-offs for consideration.

caw
INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
Following the adoption of the UN 2030 Agenda, we established a Steering Committee to coordinate, monitor and report on the implementation of the SDGs in Mauritius. The MFARIIT presently has the responsibility for and takes the leadership role in coordinating, monitoring and reporting processes.
In addition, pending the adoption of the draft Roadmap for the Implementation in the Republic of Mauritius and establishment of the proposed SDG working structure, we have the National Network for Sustainable Development (NNSD) and National Economic & Social Council (NESC). While these two structures are not directly linked to the implementation of the SDGs, they nevertheless look into the implementation of national policies which are geared towards sustainable development. For example, the NESC addresses key social economic issues and strengthen dialogue with the private sector and the Civil Society.
To ensure an inclusive, transparent and coherent approach, which brings together all relevant stakeholders and partners, an Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee at the apex, to serve as the high-level platform on the implementation of the SDGs and chaired by the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration & International Trade is envisaged.
We will also establish four Working Groups that will allow us to build more synergies across sectors, address bottlenecks, sustain and accelerate progress, establish partnerships, comprehensive measurement mechanisms and help explore financing options.
The public and private sector stakeholders, NGOs and academia will all form part of these institutional arrangements.



Social Housing in Mauritius

OUR APPROACH TO SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Our objective is to create an inclusive society where all our citizens are treated in an equitable and fair manner. To improve the lives of our people, we have a well-established welfare system which dates back to the early 1 940s. Over time we consolidated our welfare system, making it more inclusive and supportive towards the needs of our citizens.
In Mauritius, education is free from pre-primary to tertiary levels. Government provides free transport to students, the elderly as well as the disabled. We have a universal free health care system. Every citizen is entitled to a non-contributory old age pension. Widows, invalids and orphans are also entitled to pensions, subject to satisfying the eligibility criteria. To provide an enabling environment to our people, we have a number of social protection schemes, targeting specially the vulnerable segments of our society.
Despite significant efforts by Government, around 1 0 percent of our people still live in relative poverty. This percentage is not determined by the extreme poverty criterion as set by the World Bank, considering that absolute poverty is negligible in Mauritius. To understand the domestic situation and dynamics among the vulnerable segments, we developed a homegrown indicator to measure poverty, known as the Relative Poverty Line (RPL)3
The Poverty Analysis Report of Mauritius in 201 2 demonstrated that poverty is more prevalent among specific groups in our society. People with low education, the elderly, single parent households, families with three or more children are more likely to experience poverty. Poverty is also exacerbated by inadequate and poor housing conditions9
With a view to scaling up our efforts to combat poverty and social exclusion, Mauritius implemented the Empowerment Programme in 2006, with a Rs 5 billion (approximately USD 1 41 million) fund for poverty alleviation projects. This led to the establishment of the National Empowerment Foundation (NEF) in 2008 which had the overall responsibility of coordinating the implementation of the Empowerment Programme. Our efforts to combat poverty took a new turn in 201 0 when we set up a Ministry specifically dedicated to Social Integration and Economic Empowerment.
In 201 4, Mauritius committed itself to new measures for combating poverty. In 2016, we introduced a landmark legislation, the Social Integration and Empowerment Act along with a host of measures. We revamped the database of families trapped in poverty which is the Social Register of Mauritius (SRM). Our main focus is to target those families which are in extreme poverty. Such families account for 1 1,222 10 households both in Mauritius and Rodrigues and they feature on the SRM.
In 2016, we introduced the Marshall Plan Against Poverty. The beneficiaries enter into a social contract with Government and they have a number of obligations to honour. Under the Social Integration and Empowerment Act of 2016, the beneficiaries are provided with support under the different empowerment schemes, such as, creche, child allowance, school material, free examination
fees, training, placement and social housing. Under the Marshall Plan, families which are eligible on the SRM and have signed a social contract are given a subsistence allowance to boost their monthly income. For the fiscal year 2018-2019, around Rs 240 million (approximately USD 6.7 million) will be disbursed as subsistence allowance.

The fight against poverty is above all a concerted effort of all stakeholders. We work closely with Civil Society through the National CSR Foundation. The Foundation allocates funds to NGOs for programmes and projects in approved priority areas for individuals and families registered under the SRM and for vulnerable groups. The foundation is currently supporting more than 200 NGOs and has so far approved funding of programmes and projects for a total amount of Rs 500 million (approximately USD 14 million). As from January 2019, companies are contributing at least 75 percent of their CSR money to the Foundation.
In a spirit of partnership, Community Working Groups have been set up in Mauritius and Rodrigues by the NEF to support eligible beneficiaries under the SRM to connect with various Government programmes and services and to open doors for their empowerment.


Community Working Group - Empowering Women

In January 201 8, we introduced a national minimum wage. This has narrowed the wage differential between the high and the low-income earners. We also introduced the negative income tax. By increasing their household income through these two measures, families suffering from poverty have experienced an improvement in their purchasing power and a higher standard of living, with an overall net positive impact on growth.
Statistical reports show that women in Mauritius are particularly vulnerable to poverty. In 201 7, 1 30,500 Mauritians lived in poverty, of whom 70,300 were women. We are making special efforts to address the feminisation of poverty. The National Women's Entrepreneur Council (NWEC) is working on a number of entrepreneurial projects to empower women. Women entrepreneurs get up to Rs 500,000 (approximately USD 1 5,000) to start their business without requiring too much collateral.
Our efforts towards ending poverty have started to bear fruits. For the first time in 1 6 years, Mauritius is experiencing a reduction in inequality and an increase in income share held by the lowest 20 percent of households ll
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Partnership with the European Union to Combat Poverty
The EU is funding a Decentralised Cooperation Programme (DCP) whereby it is financially supporting NGOs and community-based
organisations on poverty- reduction projects. Since 2006, some 41 2 grants, worth Rs 456 million (approximately USD 1 2.8 million) have been allocated to strengthen capacity development of NGOs in key areas such as project management, strategic planning, governance and policy dialogue.
2. ZEP Project
The Zones d'éducation Prioritaires (ZEP) project which exists since 2003 aims at combating poverty through Education. This project focuses at encouraging primary school children coming from disadvantaged background to attend schools. This project is delivered in partnership with the Government, teachers, parents, community-based NGOs and the private sector. A daily meal is provided to each pupil of the ZEP school.
Over the years the project has evolved into ZEP Il project and a Community School Project. The pillars of the project are:
(i) a focus on literacy and numeracy;
(ii) a continuous professional development programme for Head Masters and Educators;
(iii) the setting up of a Resource Centre to provide pedagogical tools to Educators;


Il l-Household Budget Survey 201 8, Statistics Mauritius

caw

(iv) the setting up of an after school programme to support the education of pupils both on academic subjects and in extra-curricular activities; and
(v) a parent Outreach Programme to support parents in the School Community.
The 2019-2020 budget provides additional resources to transform schools into a fortified learning environment. The key performance indicators of the ZEP Project are pupil attendance and their academic performance 12
Rotary Club of Port-Louis Breakfast Project at La
Briqueterie Government School

Figure 5:Rate of pupils' absenteeism in all ZEP SchoolsFigure 6: Primary level pass rate in all ZEP Schoolsv/s Academic Yearsv/s Academic years
601 .71311.711.710.69.79.08.99.117
16
15
40
14
 13
 12
11
10
9
8
2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Source: Ministry of Education2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Source: Ministry of Education
The ZEP Project shows a positive impact on academic and non-academic performance: absenteeism has declined and pass-rates have risen (Figures 5 and 6)
The ZEP initiative has been so successful that in 2016 Mauritius launched the ZEP Il programme to redesign schools in major poverty pockets and to build their capacity to tenaciously confront poverty-related barriers to teaching and learning.
We wish to also highlight the Community School Project which is part of the Marshall Plan to improve the educational performance of students at primary level.

12Source: Ministry of Education

eaas,
3. Social Housing Programme
Poverty is exacerbated by inadequate and poor housing conditions. As part of our social protection programme, in 201 7 we set out a 3-year plan to commit Rs 6.8 billion (approximately USD 190.4 million) towards construction of social and low-income housing units and improving living conditions. As a result, low-income groups now have access to concessionary financing for their housing units and grants for casting roof slabs.
4. Lovebridge
Lovebridge is a public-private partnership with an innovative approach to fighting poverty. It is run as a five year pilot project, under the stewardship of Business Mauritius.
The Lovebridge method tackles poverty in a holistic manner by intervening on six pillars: Education,	Employment-Employability-Training,
Housing, Food & Nutrition, Health and MASCO
(Motivation, Attitude towards Empowerment &
Self-Help, Skills & Know-How and Courage)
Lovebridge works constructively on individualised Field staff of Lovebridge visiting beneficiary families strategies and practical action plans to help families progressively step out of poverty.

Our challenge is to have an effective coordination between the public and private sectors and the Civil Society. Improved coordination will strengthen the Monitoring and Evaluation processes in the implementation of the Marshall Plan.Monitoring, evaluation and coordination across the system involving all stakeholders will help identify complementary intervention areas that would further positively impact on the living standards of recipients of social protection programmes.Despite sustained efforts made to empower vulnerable groups, the relative poverty level still remains at 1 0 percent, thereby, hindering inclusive growth. We need to make an impact assessment that will improve our actions and policies to further tackle relative poverty in Mauritius.Sensitisation campaigns and closer case management are necessary so that vulnerable groups exit the poverty trap in a sustainable manner. This will help towards establishing a more inclusive society in which all nationals are given equal opportunities.
caw
22 eaasp

ZERO
HUNGER
-Mix"
Port Louis Central Market
2
END HUNGER, ACHIEVE
FOOD SECURITY, AND IMPROVED
NUTRITION AND PROMOTE
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE


Agriculture, in particular sugarcane cultivation, has long played a pivotal role in our socio-economic development. The success of our sugar industry has, to a significant extent, been due to the preferential trade agreement, in particular, with the El-J. Stable revenues from sugar exports in the 80s and 90s provided funding for diversification of the Mauritian economy in the tourism, financial services and manufacturing sectors, including hard currency to meet our imports.
The contribution of agriculture to GDP decreased from a high of 30 percent in the 70s to approximately 3 percent in 2018. The major challenges which the sector has faced are: new development strategy of the country with more emphasis on manufacturing and services; land pressure for other activities and the erosion of preferential market access, especially for our sugar. With all these setbacks, the sugar sector had to be reinvented.
The public and private sectors worked together to restructure the sugar sector, turning it into the cane industry with diversified activities. As part of the restructuration, many sugar factories had to close down to enhance production efficiency. Today, only three factories are operational and we are optimising the use of by-products from sugar by producing ethanol, electricity and molasses. To address the social dimension of factory closure, workers were provided with the Voluntary Retirement Scheme (VRS). The private sector is producing special and value-added sugars for export to international markets.
Today, our non-sugar sector has taken prominence. Despite limited land availability for agriculture and farming, we are almost 1 00 percent self-sufficient in the production of fresh vegetables, tropical fruits, poultry meat and eggs, except for off-season imports of selected vegetables and whenever we are hit by natural calamities. Mauritius remains a net food importer. We import 77 percent of our food requirements, exposing us to international pressures, such as fluctuating freight prices, exchange rate fluctuations and sourcing concerns.
Locally, we also face challenges relating to an ageing farming community and a lack of interest from our youth to join the agricultural sector. Due to the lack of labour and incapacity for conventional production methods to meet our needs, Mauritius has had to evolve towards sustainable and highperforming production systems.
As a SIDS, Mauritius frequently faces the adverse impacts of climate change, including flashfloods and extreme dry seasons. These extreme weather conditions add further pressure on our agricultural sector thus exacerbating food insecurity in Mauritius.
Motivated by food security concerns, Mauritius has to maintain a buffer stock 4 Mauritius has set up initiatives to enable development through agri-business promotion mainly through the development of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and an array of supporting institutions.
To encourage our population to consume healthily, we are promoting organic and bio-farming practices. Our aim is to bring a substantial share of our production system to bio norms by 2020 and provide incentives to encourage the use of bio-inputs. To this end, Government introduced in 201 6 the Bio-farming Development Certificate and the Use of Pesticides Act in 2018. With a view to promoting food safety and efficient sustainable production practices, Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) are being encouraged.
In addition, sustainable agricultural practices that can adapt to climate change impact and ecofriendly methods of production are reflected in our policies and programmes.
In order to ensure access to nutritious food at affordable prices and reduce food waste, Mauritius has two main objectives: increase the production of high-quality strategic crops, vegetables and meat to satisfy local demand and promote the development of the agri-business sector to enhance import substitution1 4
The radical change to bio-farming runs parallel with our commitment to food security and quality standards. We provide an array of specific and dedicated SME and entrepreneurship schemes and incentives to attract our youth, including women, to become agri-preneurs.
To optimise resources and ensure cost effectiveness, the Food and Agricultural Research and Extension Institute (FAREI) is using technology to work in a smarter way and enhance capacity building. ICT-based services such as the SMS Disease Alert to registered growers and the Online Plant Disease Diagnosis for rapid diagnosis and recommendation for control have changed the way technology interacts with farmers to provide justin-time solutions. Drone technology, starting with the sugar industry, is also being used to improve assessment and monitoring of crop performance in large areas.
In parallel, agriculture in Rodrigues continues to be the backbone of the economy. The sector is predominantly based on subsistence production of staple food crops. The island is renowned for its production of quality ti-pima (chillies), lemons and honey. While farmers in Rodrigues usually make limited use of agro-chemicals, agriculture in Rodrigues is exposed to pests. This affects production and exports towards mainland Mauritius, hence, the livelihood of the local population.
With the financial support of the EU, the RRA is encouraging smart agriculture with the setting up of bio-farms in two different regions. A new scheme, the Family Farm, has also been introduced to help and empower needy families, especially women, to become independent.
Livestock farming is widespread in Rodrigues. Model farms have been set up for the rearing of pigs and cows. These farms are supported through a 75 percent grant including an allocation of land for pastures.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Bio-Farming
A Bio-farming Development Certificate with an 8-year tax holiday scheme and exemption from various taxes and duties on importation of biofertilizer and bio pesticides was introduced in 2016. The creation of the Mauritius Agricultural Certification Body in 2016 provides certification for GAP. To-date, 28 certifications have been issued to small planters, representing an area of
50.31 hectares.
Since 2014, a national project funded by the UNDP is being implemented and four workshops have been organized to sensitise farmers on zerobudget/natural farming. Demonstration plots have also been set up to demonstrate the use of locallyprepared soil enricher, organic mulch, mixed cropping, crop rotation, amongst others 15
2. Control of Use of Pesticides
In 2018, Mauritius enacted the 'Use of Pesticides Act' to regulate, control and monitor the importation and use of pesticides to minimise risks to human health and the environment.
Sensitisation campaigns have been initiated on the effects of pesticides abuse on our health and our soil.


14Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security, Strategic Plan (2016-2020) For The Food Crop, Livestock and Forestry Sectors
15Ministry of Agro Industry and Food Security, Strategic Plan (2016-2020) For The Food Crop, Livestock and Forestry Sectors
25
caw

3. Sheltered Farming
We are encouraging farmers to shift from traditional open field cultivation to sheltered farming system. This will enable farmers to mitigate effects of adverse climatic conditions, improve production capacity and the quality of farm produce. We are providing a grant of 50 percent on investment costs up to a maximum of Rs 400,000 5 (approximately USD 1 1,175). With the view to attracting more young people to the agricultural sector and address labour shortage, we are resorting to innovative and modern food production practices such as sheltered farming equipped with rain harvesting and photovoltaic systems.
4. Skill Development

Sheltered Farming Unit in the South

Skill development is being encouraged through the Skills and Entrepreneurship Development Programme, under which we are providing 0.5 acre of land to unemployed graduates for sheltered farming. Currently implemented in the South, this pilot project will be rolled out to other regions in the country. Its success demonstrates that these initiatives can be instrumental towards moving to a more sustainable model of agriculture. The programme is expected to allow trainees to gain skills and experience they need to create selfemployment opportunities with decent revenue generation potential in the non-sugar segment through the adoption of innovative production technologies.

CHALLENGES


Climate change is threatening food security through heavy rain, drought and other phenomena. These can impact severely on our farmers.
OPPORTUNITIES


A number of sectoral climate change adaptation projects are being implemented to enhance resilience, including the Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM).
A crop-loss compensation scheme has been set up to compensate planters from crop loss in the event of any calamity.
Enhanced management of flooding and landslide risks from heavy rains and climate change is being addressed through the Land Drainage Authority. The national land drainage system and its characteristics and risks will be properly mapped and standards will be set and enforced.

In recent years, significant agricultural land areas have made way for infrastructure and residential development. The area of cultivable land, water courses and biomass sources are under tremendous pressure to meet highly competing and at times conflicting demands for development.
A proper strategy must be developed to promote mixed use and higher density development to ensure sustainable management of land resources for agricultural, industrial, services, commercial and residential zones, and ecologically sensitive areas.
production.
Modern eco-friendly farming, smart practices and technologies including bio-farming, hydroponics, and hybrid crop varieties will help increase production of nutritious food and raise the levels of national food security.

R&D in new technologies is being promoted to accelerate innovation, increase land productivity, sustainable production and attract techno-savvy agri-preneurs into this sector. We must pursue a smarter agriculture land use by bringing abandoned lands under new cultivation, through continued diversification within the sugar sector and targeting strategic crops to boost import substitution

Improving the level of selfsufficiency at affordable prices (both in production and in human capital) is important as Mauritius imports 77 percent of its local food consumption requirements.
We must attract more women and our educated youth to agribusiness. We have put in place entrepreneurship programmes that focus more on innovation and smart production systems based on the cluster farming model. We are boosting food production through cross-border initiatives to ensure food security and improve the livelihood of farmers.


27






3
ENSURE HEALTHY LIVES
AND PROMOTE WELL-BEING
FOR ALL AT ALL AGES


Mauritius recognises that the good health of its citizens is vital to achieving an excellent quality of life and the pursuit of happiness. The political and historical context of Mauritius demonstrate that, after independence, the country made longterm commitments to achieve Universal Health Coverage (UHC), and have in place a public health system which provides the conditions in which the people can be healthy.
Successive Governments have sustained the provision of free healthcare services in the public sector because investing in health is an effective and sustainable way to enhance human development and social well-being. Today the total expenditure of the health sector represents 5.83 percent of our GDP. Investment in public health has increased from Rs 9.69 billion in financial year 201 5/16 to Rs 1 2.26 billion in financial year 201 8/1 9, representing an increase of 27 percent.
Mauritius provides primary, secondary and specialised health services through a network of five regional, two district and six specialised hospitals. These services are free to the population and to non-residents visiting Mauritian hospitals. In addition, the public service employs 51.7 percent of total registered doctors in the country. We have made remarkable progress towards achieving IJHC in Mauritius which has allowed us achieve Target 3.8.
Mauritius has already achieved some of the targets under SDG3 well ahead of 2030. In the last thirty years, life expectancy at birth increased from 65 years to 74.7 years. The infant mortality rate per thousand live births improved from 18.6 in 1 991 to 1 2.2 in 201 7. In 201 7, the Under 5 Mortality Rate
was 14.3 per 1,000 live births. Maternal mortality ratio is relatively low when compared to other countries. In 2018, the Maternal Mortality Rate per 1 000 live births was 0.39. Tuberculosis Incidence Rate was low (9.4 per 1 00,000 population) and Malaria Incidence Rate was very low (2.2 per 1 00,000 population) (all imported cases).
We have enumerated measures to achieve SDG3 targets in a number of key strategic policy papers. In our Government Programme 201 5-2019, we emphasised the provision of universal, accessible and quality health services, free of any user cost, with emphasis on customer satisfaction. The Three-year Strategic Plan 2018-2019 to 20202021 underscores Mauritius commitment to support universal and affordable access to high quality care for all. As per its Customer Charter, the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life, has the overall responsibility for ensuring that quality and equitable health services are available to the entire population.
Over the years, Government has encouraged the private sector to invest in state-of-the-art medical facilities. Civil Society is also our strong partner as it has been supportive, mostly in areas such as community empowerment on sexual and reproductive health, combating alcohol and drug abuse, prevention of cancer and diabetes, and road safety awareness.

17Health Statistics Report 2017
IBNational Sport and Physical Activity Policy for the Republic of Mauritius 2018-2028Despite significant progress in the health sector, Mauritius is facing a number of health challenges, such as a high prevalence of NCDs, including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, hypertension and cancer". Type Il diabetes is expected to account for an average of 1 out of 4 deaths in Mauritius18
To address these, Government has engaged in intensive sensitisation campaigns and is promoting a healthy lifestyle amongst the citizens. NCD Clinics in all Community Health Centres, Area Health Centres and Mediclinics, have been introduced with dedicated personnel. We have set up specialised clinics for diabetic foot and encourage people to stop smoking. Thus, routine monitoring, screening as well as early detection have enabled us to control the prevalence of NCDs in the country. We increased our spending on early disease detection programmes from Rs 2.80 million (approximately USD 78,000) in 2014 to Rs 47.84 million (approximately USD 1.3 million) in 2016. In 201 6, we spent around Rs 1 6.5 billion (approximately USD 450 million), which is around 66.5 percent, on NCDs, the largest share of health expenditure on diseases 9
Cancer remains a big challenge for us. In 2018, we registered 2,861 new cancer cases, an increase of approximately 86 percent from 2009. The most common are prostate cancer among males and breast cancer among females. We also noted that death from cancer has been on an increasing trend from 9.4 percent of total deaths in 2000 to 1 3.8 percent in 201 7 21
With regard to HIV/AIDS, Government provides free Voluntary Counselling and Testing (VCT), anti-retroviral (ARV) drugs, methadone as well as implement a Needle Exchange Programme (NEP). A National Action Plan (NAP) has been developed for HIV/AIDS covering the period 2017-2021 which includes effective strategies such as 'Test and Treat' to meet the UNAIDS 9090-90 treatment targets. We have gone further to now train healthcare assistants and social workers from NGOs to conduct HIV testing and provide counselling. HIV/AIDS Incidence Rate was estimated at 29.1 per 1 00,000 population in 201 722
A National Drugs and HIV Council was set up under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister which fosters a multi-sectoral approach for a stronger Drugs and HIV response in Mauritius. A National the National Drug response and the National AIDS Secretariat currently under the Ministry of Health and Quality of Life coordinates the National HIV response.
We are also attentive to the needs of Mauritians who have complicated health issues and cannot be treated here. Such patients are provided with financial assistance. In 201 7, 199 patients were referred abroad for treatment.
To complement the services of the public sector, as at 201 7, the island had 1 7 private healthcare institutions, with a total of 664 beds. They provide mainly curative and specialised services.


New Diabetes and Vascular Health Centre at Souillac Hospital

Figure 7: Estimated number of new Cancer cases in2018
Breast, 659 , 23%
Other Cancers, 1,187 ,
41%
Colorectum, 288 , 10!
Corpus uteri, 85 , 3%
Cervix uteri, 120 , 4%
Prostate, 177 , 6%
Drug Secretariat has been created to coordinate
19 National Health Accounts Report 201 7
20World Health Organisation
21 Health Statistics Report 2017
22 Health Statistics Report 2017
Source: World Health Organisation
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. National Sensitization Campaign to Combat
NCDs
In 201 7, Government launched a National Sensitisation Campaign on NCDs to educate its citizens on the importance of good health and wellbeing. As a preventive measure, free screening through mobile NCDs clinics is regularly carried out throughout the country. We also provide educational and communication material to the public to educate them on NCDs and their risk factors. We have increased taxes on alcohol and tobacco. We also introduced a sugar tax on the amount of sugar in soft drinks and banned soft drinks from school canteens. These intensive screening and sensitization programmes have, in 201 7, reversed the trend in mortality due to NCDs which was on the rise between 201 1 and 201 6 6
2. Improving Management of Diabetes
Diabetes (23.1 percent) remains the principal cause of death among our population. In 2006, the prevalence of Type Il Diabetes in the 20-74 age group was 20.5 percent7. To further strengthen existing facilities in the management, assessment and treatment of diabetes, we are working closely with the WHO and we introduced specialised diabetes clinics. We appointed diabetologists who were posted in Mediclinics and Area Health Centres to improve proximity with diabetic patients. With specialised personnel, these clinics adopt a holistic and multidisciplinary approach in patient care. The WHO also provided technical and financial support for the training of doctors and nurses in Rodrigues.
These initiatives have shown results. The percentage of deaths due to diabetes decreased from a peak of 26.3 percent in 2012 to 23.1 percent in 201 7 8
3. Girls' and Women's Health
Government provides free pre-natal, maternal and child health care services in all public primary healthcare facilities. There is close monitoring of the health of future mothers and babies while qualified and skilled personnel perform the deliveries. We also ensure postnatal care services for mothers and babies. The health of children is also monitored at the pre-primary and primary school levels.
These initiatives have allowed us mainly to keep maternal mortality ratio per 1,000 live births at 0.39 in 201 7. Infant mortality rate, that is, deaths among children aged under-one, was 1 1.7 per 1,000 live births, compared to 1 1.6 in 2016 and 15.3 in 2007. The 2016 figure was the lowest ever recorded. Among the main causes identified are congenital anomalies, septicaemia and infections specific to perinatal period. Infant mortality rate was comparatively higher in Rodrigues with 19.8 per 1,000 live births in 201 7.
Moreover, in 2017, we registered 8.3 percent of total live births among mothers aged less than 20 years, a decrease from the 1 1.6 percent registered in 201 1 among teenagers, which demonstrates that sex education is working.

HPV Vaccine and Breast Cancer Detection
The Caravane de Santé, that is the Mobile Clinic Service, is geared towards providing health services to the community at their doorstep. This service, in 2016, screened around 8,050 women for breast and cervical cancer. The Human Papil/oma Virus (HPV) vaccination, which protects girls against the four strands of HPV mostly associated with cervical cancer has also been introduced. Some 24,804 doses were administered in 201 7. Through this measure, Government aims at the emergence of a cervical cancer-free generation of women in
Mauritius.	Mobile Clinic Service
5. Continuous Fight to Control HIV/AIDS
Adopting a human rights approach to HIV and AIDS is key to eradicating stigma and discrimation faced by people living with HIV. PILS (Prévention Information Lutte Contre le SIDA), an NGO, has been instrumental in bringing a catalytic revolution in the sensitisation and awareness around HIV/ AIDS. Intense efforts by PILS working closely with our health authorities led to the enactment of the 2006 HIV/AIDS Act. We have made significant progress since then.
HIV prevalence was estimated at 0.80 percent in 201 5 and remained under control below 1 percent during 201 6 and 201 7. As of December 201 7, 3601 adults and children were receiving AntiRetroviral Therapy (ART), with an adherence rate of 74 percent. The percentage of pregnant women who are HIV positive receiving antiretroviral treatment to prevent mother-to-child transmission has improved from 68 percent in 2009 to 96.3 percent in 201 7. The prevalence of HIV among pregnant women remains under 1 percent.
There are eight Day Care Centres for the Immunosuppressed and a Rapid Testing Caravan is also operational to carry out HIV testing in the community.
Prison inmates are also provided with ARV drugs. As at February 2019, only 1 5 percent of the prison population were living with HIV/AIDS and 78 percent of them were already on antiretroviral treatment. Moreover, HIV/AIDS awareness programmes are conducted at the national level, especially through mass media and in secondary schools.

Box 3: Leading practice - Smoking
As a party to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) since 2004, Mauritius implemented some of the strongest and most progressive tobacco policies in Africa and we are one of the leaders in tobacco control in the region. In 2009, Mauritius was the first in Africa to implement pictorial warnings on cigarette packages. We are leading in implementing articles under the FCTC, in the areas of packaging and labelling, tobacco cessation and smoke free regulations.
Mauritius is also the first African country to adopt a comprehensive smoke free legislation and the first country worldwide to ban smoking in vehicles carrying passengers.

According to the population are weekly minutes of remains how to environment and well-being to 
Diabetes and challenges.    WHO only engaged in physical promote an conducive to prevent 
Cancer     23 the activity. The active improved NCDs.
remain percent 
lifestyle quality 
our    of the 1 50 challenge and an of life
majorWe are implementing a National Sport and Physical Activity Policy for 2018-2028 with tangible actions to address our health crisis. We are encouraging our citizens to include physical activities in their lifestyle and meet the recommendations of 1 50 weekly minutes of physical activity as set by the WHO.
With the support of the Commonwealth, Mauritius will be positioned as a pilot country to introduce a common indicator framework on Sports and the SDGs into our national monitoring and evaluation system.
Government is scaling up the prevention and control of NCDs by developing a robust NCDs surveillance system and improving specialised services to address chronic conditions related to NCDs.
Mauritius is investing in a new cancer hospital which will provide more specialised clinical care for cancer patients.Mauritius has a low fertility rate and an ageing We aim to reduce infant mortality rate from 1 2.2 population. per 1,000 births in 201 7, to 10 in 2020 and 6 by 2030, by improving neo-natal services in hospitals.
We are also enhancing the quality of services offered to the public and we lay more emphasis on people-centered services.
To support individuals experiencing fertility problems, Government is considering to introduce assisted reproductive technologies in public hospitals.


CHALLENGESOur healthcare system is very costly. The total health expenditure in 2016 was approximately 5.83 percent of our GDP. Based on a total per capita expenditure on health of Rs 20,1 00 (approximately USD 559), Mauritius has one of the most expensive healthcare systems in
Africa26

OPPORTUNITIES


While provision of healthcare services to all is our priority, other means would need to be found for boosting the sector and bringing in high-end medical care.
Mauritius is positioning itself as a medical hub. In 201 6, some 18,000 foreign patients were treated hence, representing a 70 percent increase from 201 0.
To further boost health tourism, in 2018 we introduced a Visitor Medical Visa. This is issued to foreign patients upon arrival. This represents an opportunity for the private sector to strengthen its healthcare pillar.
The private sector remains our main stakeholder and we provide private companies with a number of facilities to further invest in healthcare. We are giving exemptions from registration duties, on the purchase or lease of land for the construction of infrastructure; exemption of VAT on construction of private hospitals, clinics, residential care homes or nursing homes; free repatriation of profits, dividends and capital; no capital gains tax27


Private Sector Investment in our Health Sector




26National Health Accounts 2017
27Economic Development Board


QUALITY
EDUCATION
////////7University of
Mauritius
CAMPUS PLAN
University of Mauritius

4
ENSURE INCLUSIVE AND
EQUITABLE QUALITY EDUCATION
AND PROMOTE LIFELONG LEARNING
OPPORTUNITIES FOR ALL


Education has the function of transforming societies. It brings social mobility and creates opportunities for the citizens. We long understood that with no natural resources, Mauritius had to invest in its human capital and develop a quality education which would maximize the talents and potential of our population. Successive governments have emphasized the centrality of education as a primary driver to our development.
The education sector consumes a big share of our annual budget. Over the past five years, an average of 1 2.7 percent of the national budget went to education. Investing in education has a multiplier effect on our economy. In Mauritius, we witnessed a major growth in our GNI per capita, from USD 200 in 1968 to USD 1 0,1 30 in 2017, mainly due to our heavy investment in education.
While primary education has been free in Mauritius since the 1940s, secondary schooling was made free in 1977. Moreover, tertiary education in public institutions was heavily subsidised from 1 988 and since the beginning of 2019, all postsecondary studies, leading to undergraduate ones, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, are free of charge in all Public Higher Education and Training Institutions. This landmark measure was announced as part of our vision to build a country of opportunities for all and to enhance university access and enrolment.
In Mauritius, schooling is compulsory until the age of 16. We have a literacy rate of 98.1 percent among the 1 5-24 years. Our primary school enrollment rate is also high. Despite all these encouraging statistics, we are fully aware that, as we stand at a crossroad in our socio-economic development, our education system is not as responsive to our needs as it should be. Enrolment at primary level is decreasing due to changing demographics. We cannot therefore, afford to have human resources that are inadequately qualified entering the labour market. We are addressing these areas of concerns and plugging the gaps with a bold education reform (Nine Year Continuous Basic Education - NYCBE) which was introduced in 2015. The reform is in line with SDG4 which aims at ensuring a more inclusive and equitable quality education. Children are now required to follow at least nine years of basic schooling before moving to post-basic education in their areas of interest. This acts as a solid foundation for further learning and training.
As part of this reform, at primary level, we introduced some non-core subjects, a Holistic Education programme and an Afterschool Sports and Fitness Programme along with a programme for the emotional development of our children. We are providing our school children with opportunities to learn music, sports and arts as we want them to grow holistically and enjoy what they value.
The reform process touched the secondary level in 2018 and we are ensuring that all children complete their secondary schooling. The Extended Four-year Programme for those students who need more time to attain the minimum level of competencies and who require special learning attention has been introduced. Everyone should have equal access to secondary education in a quality environment. Hence, every Regional Secondary School in Mauritius has a special class of such learners who have not met the basic primary level minimum standards. This initiative goes in the direction of leaving no one behind.
In the vocational education and training sector, we have initiated a number of significant changes and we are working closely with the private sector to ensure that courses are tailored according to the job market demands. We developed the Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) under the broad umbrella of Skills Development and in the context of NYCBE. To give greater recognition to TVET in building human capital, we have added Polytechnics to the educational and training landscape. These institutions provide the much needed high-end skills that guarantee workready diploma holders with quality training.
We also pay special attention to learners with special needs. The Special Education Needs (SEN) sector runs on the basis that no learner should be left outside the education system due to disability. It banks on the recognition of learning potential and allows parents and guardians to take an active part in their children's education.
Through our education hub, we aim at creating opportunities for students in our region. This will bring a higher level of integration that will create win-win opportunities for everyone. We are encouraging private investment, both locally and from abroad, to set up quality education institutions in the country. We want to increase the number of students in our universities from 2,087 at present level to 5,000 in a near future. In our academic institutions, we have developed programmes which are focused on building a sustainable Mauritius.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Special Education Needs
The SEN Strategy sets the framework to ensure that children requiring special education needs in Mauritius have access to relevant and quality education. In order to harmonise and promote policies for the education and holistic development of persons with special education needs, the SEN Authority Act was passed in 2018. The Act is in line with the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD).
We are working closely with NGOs to deliver education to students with special needs. Currently, 41 NGOs run 53 SEN-registered schools. They are supported by grants from the Government. In 201 7-18, we invested around Rs 1 1 5.2 million (approximately USD 3 million) to that end.
2. Education in Prison
Since the right to Education is a fundamental human right, we are also providing education to detainees. Presently, some 169 students from prisons, rehabilitation youth centres, and Shelter for Women in Distress have access to schooling. We offer courses in welding, wood, pastry and garment manufacture to upgrade their skills.
Rehabilitation through training and education is a major component of our Strategic Plan for Prisons. This will avoid recidivism by engaging detainees in meaningful activities, thus, helping them to reintegrate society. This also goes in the direction of SDG16.
3. Assisting Students from Vulnerable Backgrounds
Besides assisting students from vulnerable backgrounds with free meals and school kits, Mauritius has a Scholarship Scheme for Children from Vulnerable Families.
39
cawThere are also scholarship schemes for higher education for students with special needs and for meritorious students from low-income groups.
4. Digital Youth Engagement Programme
ICT is becoming a new pillar of our economy and we are working towards the full digitalisation of our society. To jumpstart digital skills development at an early stage, we are promoting introductory courses on coding at primary school level. We want to enhance the interest of our young learners for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) subjects as more technologyoriented jobs will be available on the market.
The Digital Youth Engagement Programme provides 1 5-hour of coding training and targets primary school students in Grade 4. In 201 8, some 20 primary schools were covered by two mobile caravans across Mauritius with around 2,000 Grade 4 students initiated to coding.

5. Education Hub: Way Forward
The higher education sector is set to emerge as a strong pillar of the Mauritian economy to help shift the country from upper-middle to highincome status. To that end, we are encouraging internationally renowned tertiary institutions to set up local campuses, units or partnerships as we develop an Education Hub that will benefit not only Mauritius but the region.
Middlesex University from the United Kingdom and Curtin University from Australia are leading the internationalisation of our education sector.
In addition, we have offered a number of scholarships under the Mauritius—Africa Scholarships Scheme to allow more African students to study in Mauritius.
With the new initiatives in the education system, we are expecting the tertiary enrolment rate to increase to 50 percent by 2020 and 60 percent by 2030.

Figure 8: Tertiary Enrolment Rate
TERTIARY ENROLMENT RATE
	470/0	500/0

	2015	2020	2030
Tertiary enrolment rate to increase to 	by 2030Source: 3-Year Strategic Plan 2017/18 - 2019/20

CHALLENGES


We are facing major skills mismatch in our job market. We need to make more effort to keep pace with our evolving socio-economic paradigm.
OPPORTUNITIES


To address the skills mismatch in the Mauritian labour market, long-term reforms are being undertaken. Though the TVET curricula have been reviewed to respond to the growing skills requirements of our economy, the attractiveness of the TVET remains a challenge.
There is a need to encourage digital and other forms of learning and more beyond traditional learning.



Locally, we face the challenge of traditional The change in attitude vis-a-vis technical and stigma around TVET and polytechnics. vocational education is crucial.


The use of drugs and psychotropic substances There is a need for: among students is a real challenge.
i. a coordinated approach and more efforts from parents, schools, private sector and Civil Society to educate and empower students with drug resilience skills to counter the drug scourge.
ii. educational material in the primary and secondary school curricula on preventing drug use.
iii. establishing a protocol to act as a Guideline for school management to handle cases of possession of suspected i l l icit substance.





Gender Equality in the field ot Science

Mauritius is fully committed to achieving social justice, gender equity and equality. Our priority is to have a people-centered approach in our policies and to ensure that women, who constitute 50.5 percent of our population, are fully empowered to take part in the socio-economic and political activities of the country. We are aware that empowering women is an ongoing process and requires sustained efforts by everyone. SDG5 is an excellent tool to assess where Mauritius lies in gender equality and where greater efforts are needed.
We believe in women holding key leadership roles and positions in Mauritius. To bring more women in public life, we nominated women in key political positions following the 2014 general elections. For the first time in the history of Mauritius, a woman was nominated as Speaker of the National Assembly and as Vice Prime Minister of Mauritius. As it is, since the election of the first woman to our National Assembly in 1976 we have come a long way in women emancipation and their participation in structures of power. However, we cannot remain complacent because out of the 68 elected members of our Parliament only eight are women, that is, 1 1.8 percent. This is due to our electoral system which is based on first past the post. Hence, special efforts are needed by the political class to have a fairer representation of women in Parliament. This will require a new electoral model, which is already under discussion in our Parliament.
Over time, we have set in place a number of institutional and legal frameworks to promote, enforce and monitor gender equality as well as reinforcing the human rights of women. Since 1984, we have ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). We have also ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention. As part of our obligation under the Convention, last year, we submitted our eighth periodic report under article 18 to discuss the progress made under the Convention. A monitoring committee has been set up to follow up on the implementation of the various recommendations emanating from the CEDAW committee.
Besides our Constitution which prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, we have reinforced our legislations. We have thus enacted a number of legislations to improve the situation of women. (See Box 4)

WOMEN EMANCIPATION
Free education was the real trigger for the emancipation of women in Mauritius. It opened a window of opportunity for our women and brought them from the private sphere to public life. Today, women make 39 percent of all individuals employed in Mauritius. Over the past 20 years, the proportion of women holding senior positions in the public service increased from 20 percent to 37 percent. However, the challenge remains in the private sector where women holding senior positions represent seven percent at the level of Chief Executives. Girls also do better than boys in the education sector. This is good news; but it is not reflected in the rate of employment among women as the unemployment statistics show a higher number among women.
We need focused attention to further empower women, as it is their legitimate right to stand on their feet, be economically independent and participate in the economic development of the country. We are implementing many schemes to incentivise and empower women. For example, besides increasing maternity leave from 1 2 to 14 weeks, we have recently amended the Employment Rights Act to allow payment of remuneration for those mothers reckoning less than 1 2 months service. Previously, only those with 12 months of service and above were entitled to such remuneration. We are also giving women incentives to be entrepreneurs. This year on the International Women's Day, the Honorable Prime Minister announced financial assistance in the form of no guarantee loans up to Rs 500,000 for women to start a business without collateral. We are also allocating 40 percent of the space in industrial zone projects for women entrepreneurs. Through these important steps, we want our women to have a brighter future and fully participate in our developmental process.
In 201 7, out of 1 60 countries, we were ranked 84th on the UN Gender Inequality Index. With a view to addressing this situation, there are efforts targeting inter alia, domestic violence, teenage pregnancy, changing patriarchal nature of our society through information, education and communication. The complexity and magnitude of cases of violence against women remain a challenge. We are relentlessly working towards removing the stigma around gender based violence and encouraging women to report cases of violence instead of suffering in silence. In this regard, we are working closely with NGOs to assist women who are victims of domestic violence. NGOs are encouraged to open more women shelters with Government's support. Our combined efforts have led to an improvement on the overall situation of domestic violence in the country. New cases on violence reported by women to the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare halved between 201 0 (5,630 reported cases) to 2018 (2,337 reported cases).
We are paying special attention to woman's health and with the view to reducing the incidence of cervical cancer, in 201 6, we introduced the HPV vaccine for our schoolgirls. The aim is to have a cervical cancer free generation of women. We are mindful that on the Maternal Mortality Rate, the statistics are not favourable. This figure went down from 0.66 in 201 3 to 0.52 in 2014 and even further down in 2015 and 2016 (0.47 in 2015 and 0.46 in 2016). However, this has increased again to 0.74 in 201 7. More efforts are required to address this issue.
SOCIAL, ECONOMIC AND POLITICAL EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN
The National Women's Council (NWC), which operates under the aegis of the Ministry of Gender Equality, Child Development and Family Welfare, works for the empowerment of women and gender equality, especially through the active participation of women in the social, economic and political fields.
In a bid to make the NWC more responsive to the needs and concerns of contemporary Mauritian women, the Act of 1 985 was replaced by a new one in 201 6.
45
cawA Strategic Framework 2016-2020 has been adopted in November 2016 for the implementation of the provisions of the new National Women Council Act.
An Action Plan aligned to the Strategic Framework was formulated in 2018 to build an effective, well governed, accountable and vibrant Council.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Encouraging Female Participation in Political and Public Life
In 201 1, Government enacted a new Local Government Act which provides for gender-neutral quotas to increase woman's representation at local government level. The promulgation of the legislation led to a significant leap in the number of women elected at the local elections, from 1 2.7 percent in 2005 to 36.7 percent and 34.2 percent in 2012 and 2015 respectively at the Municipal Council level. At the Village Council elections, the figures increased from 5.7 percent in 2005 to 25.4 percent in 201 2. Relevant amendments were made to our Constitution in 201 6 to adopt similar quotas for the RRA.
With assistance from the UNDP, the Speaker of our National Assembly launched a Parliamentary Gender Caucus (PGC) in March 201 7. The Caucus works for the promotion and attainment of gender equality by providing a platform for members of all political parties to deliberate on and advocate for gender equality. The Caucus has recommended the carrying out of periodical gender assessments of Government policies and research on salient gender issues.
2. Gender Representation in Managerial Positions
Over the years, there has been a reasonable progress in the representation of women holding senior positions in the public service, as shown in Table l.
Women holding senior positions in the capacity of Chief Executive, in the private sector, represented only seven percent. To encourage gender balance on the Board of Directors in private companies, we introduced a Code of Corporate Governance in 201 7.

Table 1: Women in senior positions in the public service at April 2019PositionSenior Chief Executives25Permanent Secretaries36.1Deputy Permanent Secretaries53.7Assistant Permanent Secretaries60Judges52.9Magistrates65.9
3. Economic Empowerment of Women
Women participation in the labour force has increased over the last decades to reach 45.7 percent in 201 7. Female unemployment rate was estimated at 10 percent in 2018.
We have introduced several initiatives to economically empower women in Mauritius. Among them, to enable women of 35 years and above to resume employment, we have introduced since 2015 a Back-to-Work programme. Of the 3,967 eligible women who were registered on the programme, as at December 2018, 1,058 were successfully placed in employment in private enterprises or with individual employers.
Moreover, institutions such as the National Women Entrepreneur Council (NWEC) and SME Mauritius encourage women entrepreneurship. These institutions provide a range of facilities including appropriate training and capacity building, counselling, referrals to relevant institutions and opportunities to market their products both locally and abroad. We are providing concessional loans to encourage the development and growth of women entrepreneurs.
46 eaasp
4. Girls Empowerment Programmes in Deprived Regions
Since 201 7, we are giving special attention to girls from deprived regions who usually are unable to take advantage of different facilities available to them. To ensure that these girls are not left out of mainstream development, we have implemented two specific projects, namely the Goal Programme and the 3E's project: Empowerment through Education and Entertainment. Girls are empowered on thematics ranging from Sexual and Reproductive Health, Values, Leadership in avoiding Substance Abuse and Money Savvy. So far, 600 girls have been empowered through these two projects.
5. Access to Equal Opportunity
In a bid to provide equal access to opportunities for our citizens, we enacted the Equal Opportunities Act in 2008. This piece of legislation has incorporated different elements of discrimination, including gender based discrimination. The Act was amended in 201 1 to enable the setting up of an Equal Opportunity Commission (EOC) in April 201 2. The EOC works to eliminate discrimination in all sectors as well as to promote good relations between people of different status. The Commission is also mandated to safeguard and protect the rights of all citizens, including women and girls by examining and investigating into complaints referred.
6. Combating Domestic Violence
In 201 5, we set up a National Coalition Against Domestic Violence Committee to ensure that the appropriate framework is put in place for the protection of victims of domestic violence. We now have a fast track system to provide assistance and support to such victims and we have updated statistics on cases of domestic violence. We also have in place a Domestic Violence Information System (DOVIS), which is a computerised system for the registration of reported cases of domestic violence to monitor, access, record and generate specific reports on cases dealt at the six Family Support Bureaux (FSBx).
47
cawWe are working closely with three NGOs to provide temporary accommodation to women and their children who are victims of domestic violence. We financially support the victims and the NGOs. Women in distress should be given attention. In 201 9, we have set up an Integrated Support Centre (ISC) to provide immediate, consistent and coordinated support and counselling to victims on a 24-hour basis. Multiple calls can be answered simultaneously and we can also immediately liaise with other stakeholders such as the police, hospitals or shelters, for victims to be attended to within the shortest delay.

Ensuring a fairer representation of women in Parliament remains a major challenge because of the current electoral system.
Policy makers are working to reach a consensus to bring forth an electoral reform that would enable women fully participate in public and political life while keeping in mind a proper representation of the complex multi-ethnic composition of the Mauritian society. We aim at having at least 30 percent of women representation in Parliament.



Gender mainstreaming across Considering the inter-generational, demographic, economic and sectors is challenging. cultural changes during the last 10 years, a National Gender Policy (2019-2029) is being formulated. The objective, thereof, is to align it to the current Vision 2030 development agenda of Mauritius that has considerable principles of equity, inclusiveness and has embraced pathways to substantive gender equality. It also draws inspiration from global, regional and continental agendas and processes focusing on the twin issues of development and poverty reduction as well as responds to the global agenda as guided by Agenda 2030 on Sustainable Development Goals. It aims at integrating the principles of participation, accountability and transparency. Funded by the UNDP, the new framework will be used as an effective tool for Ministries to revisit their gender policies to overcome barriers that continue to undermine women in different sectors.
Training on gender Responsive Budgeting will be provided to all Ministries to ensure policies and programmes are genderresponsive.
Furthermore, we are working on a Gender Equality Bill to:
(i) promote, protect and regulate gender equality in public and private spheres;
(ii) provide for gender equality principles aimed at reducing socioeconomic and political inequalities;
(iii) eliminate	gender-based	discrimination,	in	particular, discrimination against women based on gender roles; and
(iv) provide for gender balance in public financial management through Gender Responsive Budgeting.
48 eaasp

CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION
Mare aux Vacoas Reservoir
6
ENSURE AVAILABILITY AND
SUSTAINABLE MANAGEMENT OF
WATER AND SANITATION FOR ALL


Almost all Mauritians have access to safe water across the island through six water distribution networks. Half of the potable water supplied to the population comes from groundwater.
While Mauritius receives an annual rainfall of about 3,980 million metres cube (Mm 3 ), it still experiences seasonal water scarcity and only a fraction of the rainfall can be utilised. For example, in 201 7, we could mobilise only 21 percent of our total rainfall for use. The rest was either lost through evapotranspiration and as surface run-off waters, or used for groundwater recharge. Furthermore, due to growing economic activities rapid urbanisation, changing land use practices and the impact of climate change, Mauritius required the building of additional dams.
In this context, we constructed the Bagatelle Dam as a means to improve water storage and meet the increasing water demand of highly urbanised regions such as Port Louis and lower Plaines Wilhems district.
Under the SAMOA Pathway, we recognised that sustainable management of water resources remains a major challenge for SIDS. In 201 7, we joined the UN-World Bank High Level Panel on Water as its co-chair to elaborate a comprehensive way of developing and managing water resources in line with our commitments under SDG6. In Mauritius, another significant challenge in the sustainable management of water rests with our water distribution network. The network is very old and water pipes are defective which results into considerable water losses. We estimated that 39 percent of the pipes within our water distribution network requires replacement. Since 201 5, and in line with Target 6.4, we embarked on a massive pipe replacement programme around the island to address this problem.
In view of enhancing and protecting water quality, we are investing in the construction of new water treatment plants and upgrading existing ones. As Mauritius is expanding its industrial base, we are also mindful that industrial effluents should be carefully managed and disposed of. An Effluent Discharge Permit Regulation was introduced in 2003 to ensure proper compliance with prescribed standards for water quality monitoring. This Regulation bans the discharge of any industrial waste into water bodies from which water is abstracted for domestic purposes. In addition, since 201 2, we are implementing a Water Quality Surveillance Programme to monitor the quality of potable water in our reservoirs, rivers and feeder canals.
MAURITIUS' 	ON THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS	Water is an essential commodity and we cannot afford to leave anyone without. We have a special responsibility towards those households which are in the low-income bracket. To reduce the burden on these households and ensure that they have access to potable water, we have exempted households consuming up to 6 m g per month from payment of water charges. So far, this has benefitted around 20 percent of domestic consumers. In addition, poor rainfall during the dry season, can exacerbate the difficulties of households, especially those who cannot afford water storage facilities. We have helped 57,000 such families with a water tank grant scheme. This is still ongoing.
Rodrigues faces severe droughts and this situation is getting worse every year. Depending on the region, water is distributed to households on average every fortnight. To counter water shortages between two periods of supply, the RRA provides grants and facilities to encourage households to have a rainwater harvesting system. It is also a requirement for new constructions to include such rainwater harvesting systems. Since 2014, Rodrigues has invested in the construction of four desalination plants to improve water distribution to households.
SANITATION
In Mauritius, we continue to invest significantly in the national sewerage system. Almost the entire country has access to sanitation facilities, either through on-site disposal or the national sewerage system. We plan to extend the national sewerage network to environmentally sensitive regions and areas near high water table that are frequently prone to wastewater overflows. We aim to increase connection to the national sewerage network, currently at 27 percent to at least 50 percent of the population by 2030.
Over the period 2015 to 2018, a total of 7,438 households were connected to the national sewerage system which includes 800 families from a poor background.
Though these water-related projects are capital intensive and inspite of our limited financial resources, we have committed around Rs 7 billion for the period 2015-2018 to improve the quality of life of our citizens through such projects.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Increasing Water Storage Capacity
With the construction of the Bagatelle Dam in 201 7, Mauritius increased its total water storage capacity by 14 Mm 3 A new water treatment plant of 60,000 m 3/day will be operational at Bagatelle Dam with a view to providing safe and good water quality into the distribution network.


New Bagatelle Dam constructed in 2017

2. Eco-Friendly Practices in Hotels
The hotel industry, both in Mauritius and Rodrigues, has taken the lead by investing in desalination plants for their hotel activities. Many luxury hotels, such as Lux Resorts & Hotels and St Regis Mauritius, have set up such plants, which use the reverse osmosis water purification technology to meet their daily water demands. The sustainable management of water by the private sector is of great relief to our national water supply system.

VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW REPORT OF MAURITIUS	
caw

3. Desalination Plants in Rodrigues
In 201 8, Rodrigues pioneered an innovative project in the Indian Ocean with the construction of a solar desalination plant. The plant is producing 80 m g of fresh drinking water for 2,400 inhabitants every day. At night it uses a hybrid solar-grid powered source to produce 300 m g of drinking water. This project was the result of a collaboration between the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC), the EIJ, the
AFD and RRA.	Desalination Plant in Rodrigues


CHALLENGESTo increase the number of households receiving 1 6¯24 hours of water supply, we need to mobilize an additional amount of Rs 1 7 billion.
Moreover, since wastewater projects are invariably capital intensive, we need to mobilise more funds to achieve our target of 50 percent coverage by 2030.
OPPORTUNITIESWe are planning to construct a new dam of 14 Mm3 capacity by 2024, for which appropriate funding may be acquired from various international partners.
We are also exploring other forms of financing in particular, private sector participation through either Public Private Partnership (PPP) or Built Operate Transfer (BOT) projects.

The adverse impact of climate change hinders the proper monitoring and management of our water resources. This is a serious challenge for SIDS, including Mauritius.
We are adopting new tools and techniques to monitor water quality.
We need to develop a culture of water conservation in the population at large and assist in mitigation of risks of pollution through tree planting in water catchment areas.
To help counter the problem of water shortages in Rodrigues, we are seeking Indian expertise to prepare a comprehensive Rodrigues Water Development Plan.
To improve monitoring and maintenance capacity, we require appropriate training for existing personnel for both Mauritius and Rodrigues.




Wind Farm at Plaine des Roches
7
ENSURE ACCESS TO AFFORDABLE, RELIABLE, SUSTAINABLE AND
MODERN ENERGY FOR ALL

As Mauritius has no reserves of oil, gas or coal, it has come up with a strategy to enhance its energy security through a progressive shift to clean renewable energy and energy efficient technologies. Bagasse, a by-product of sugarcane, is our main source of renewable energy (1 4.1 percent in 2018). We also generate electricity from hydro, wind, landfill gas and solar sources.
During the last decade, Mauritius has made tremendous improvement in its electricity sector. Currently 99.6 percent of the population have access to a reliable supply of electricity. Mauritius has achieved its SDG target of providing access to electricity to the whole country. This has beenThe Central Electricity Board (CEB) is the sole agency for the transmission, distribution, and sale of electricity. It currently produces 46.4 percent of the country's total power requirement from four thermal power stations and eight hydroelectric plants. The remaining 53.6 percent is purchased from Independent Power Producers, mainly private generators from the sugarcane industry. Bagasse is used to fuel the power plants during the crop season, while coal is used during the remaining part of the year.possible due to bold decisions, timely planning and investment in our energy generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure.

Figure 9: Share of Renewable Energy (RE) Sources In Mauritius' Electricity Mix In 2018
Gas Turbine
Hydro
4%
Wind
0.4%
Landfill gas
0.7%
Photovoltaic
1.5%


Mauritius depends heavily on the import of charcoal, diesel and heavy fuel oil to produce electricity. Our policy is to reduce our dependency on fossil fuel and decrease our greenhouse gas emission. As part of our Renewable Energy Roadmap 2030, Government is working to achieve 35 percent renewable sources in the electricity mix by 2025 and to maintain this level until 2030.
Since 2015, six new solar farms have been commissioned. Forthcoming projects include four new solar farms, a waste-to-energy project of total capacity 20 MW by mid-2022, increased battery storage from 4 to 18 MW by mid-2020, a new scheme for Small Scale Distribution Generation (SSDG) and the installation of 25,000 smart meters. At this pace of project commissioning and implementation, the target of 35 percent RE by 2025 is achievable.
With the view to reducing our energy consumption, we introduced measures such as energy efficiency labelling of electrical appliances, mandatory energy audits in government buildings and energy intensive private enterprises, Solar Photovoltaic Rebate Scheme for Cooperative Societies and a Home Solar Project targeting 1 0,000 low-income households. These households will benefit from 50 kWh of electricity free of charge on a monthly basis for a period of 20 years, and any surplus electricity produced will be injected into the national grid. In 201 8, the Home Solar Project was ranked first out of 89 projects submitted to the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA). In addition, the Building Control Act 201 1 provides opportunities for designing "green" buildings and controlling the quality and supply of equipment and materials, which should be energy efficient.
Legal and institutional reforms have been undertaken to achieve better coordination of these changes to our energy sector. The Utility Regulatory Authority (URA) has been set up to regulate electricity, water and wastewater while the Mauritius Renewable Energy Agency (MARENA) has been created to oversee the development of renewable energy in Mauritius.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Renewable Energy
Mauritius is implementing a number of measures and projects to meet its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) pledges made in the context of the 2015 Paris Agreement on climate change. With the implementation of the Green Climate Fund (GCF) project 'Accelerating Transformational Shift to a Low Carbon Economy in the Republic of Mauritius', we aim at reducing our carbon emission by 4.27 million tonnes from 201 7 to 2025.
In our endeavour to move towards RE, we have involved different segments of our society. We have put in place projects such as the SSDG for households and the Medium-Scale Distributed Generation (MSDG) for the commercial sector. This has allowed for the integration of 9 MW of new Photovoltaic (PV) installations in Mauritius and about 331 kW in Rodrigues. Part of the initial investment of 15 percent in PV can be recouped through a relief in tax payment under the SSDG scheme.
Private sector investment is critical in our strategy to increase the share of RE in the energy mix. From 201 5 to 201 8, we have set up and commissioned a total capacity of 64 MW solar farms. Wind is also a highly valuable resource and we are exploiting it to ensure long-term security of supply.
Preliminary research carried out by the Mauritius Research Council (MRC) shows potential for the development of offshore wind farms and tapping wave energy in the waters of Mauritius and Rodrigues. A 9 MW onshore wind farm is already operational since 2016 in Mauritius. In Rodrigues, two wind farms were commissioned in 2004 and 201 0, of capacity 180 kW and 1.1 MW respectively.

	REPORT OF MAURITIUS	55
caw
2. Programme Nationale d'Efficacité
Energétique (PNEE) in Collaboration with the Private Sector
In collaboration with Business Mauritius and AFD, a national energy efficiency programme has been implemented. Energy audits were undertaken in 88 buildings to reduce electricity consumption. This has reduced C02 generation by 1 73,000 tonnes. SWITCH Africa Green also provided postaudit funding support to the PNEE programme. The project is being extended for a second phase from 201 8 to 2022 9
Solar farm in Mauritius

3. Awareness in Energy Efficiency

We are promoting energy efficiency through intensive sensitisation campaigns in schools and at community level. We are working closely with Municipal Corporations and Village Councils on a continuous basis with the support of the Energy Efficiency Management Office (EEMO). The EEMO which was set up in accordance with the Energy Efficiency Act, is responsible for the creation of national awareness for the efficient use of energy.

OPPORTUNITIESCHALLENGES
The intermittency of RE electricity poses a challenge in terms of controlling and stabilising the frequency of the electricity grid, particularly to cater for any sudden fall in power output. This may impose a limit on the extent of intermittent REThe cost of sustaining energy efficiency technologies is high. CEB proposes to progressively increase the capacity of the Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) to 18 MW. The CEB will assess the situation and take remedial action so as to maintain a high quality of power supply in Mauritius.absorption in the grid, even if batteries are being deployed to mitigate the problem.


We have limited access to cleaner energy sources. Although Mauritius is endowed with sunshine and wind, there is a limitation in terms of availability of land for implementation of large-scale PV and wind farms. An offshore wind farm may be contemplated, however, the technology remains nonetheless very expensive. Financial resources are also a majorWe are considering the development of a regional Hub for Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).
A new project of waste-to-energy will be operational in 2022. This project will both produce electricity and alleviate the problem posed by waste disposal.
Investment opportunities for Deep Ocean Water Application (DOWA) are being explored.constraint for the implementation and management of RE projects.



SME Market Fair in Port Louis

8
PROMOTE SUSTAINED,
INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE
ECONOMIC GROWTH, FULL AND
PRODUCTIVE EMPLOYMENT AND
DECENT WORK FOR ALL


Due to its economic diversification and proactive measures, the Mauritian economy has been resilient to external shocks, particularly during the 2007-08 global financial crisis. While agriculture, manufacturing and tourism are the traditional pillars of our economy, we have over time developed new growth sectors such as Financial Services, ICT and the Ocean Economy. In 201 5, we announced a new economic vision to chart out our path towards a more inclusive and sustainable high-income economy. By 2023, we project to reach a per capita GNI of USD 1 3,550 and become a HighIncome Country. Eventually we are targeting a per capita GNI of USD 1 9,000 by 2030.
All our policies and actions are geared towards our long-term development priorities which are aligned to the SDGs. We are engaged in the creation of a strong, diversified, competitive, resilient and innovative business ecosystem. We are at the same time taking appropriate measures for the structural transformation of the economy and to address the challenges facing the country. In this respect, we have implemented a number of reforms for business facilitation. Today we are among the top 20 countries in the world and leading in Africa in the Ease of Doing Business ranking. Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) inflows have been relatively high during the past few years.
We are developing Mauritius into a digital economy and a Fintech Hub for the region. To raise productivity and enhance our international competitiveness, we are adopting Blockchain, Al and other technologies and adapting to the fourth industrial revolution. Another leg of our strategy is to promote innovation across all sectors of the economy.
The tourism sector is an important source of income and employment for Mauritius. In view of increasing competition from other countries in the region, we have significantly opened up air access. Today the sector is more diversified in terms of markets and products. Similarly, we have made significant progress in improving our regulatory framework for the global business sector in compliance with international anti-tax avoidance initiatives.
The trade deficit between Mauritius and the rest of the world has increased during the past few years. In response, we have adopted a twopronged approach: import substitution and export promotion. New incentives are in place to enhance the local production of food crops, through sheltered farming and aquaculture. As regards to export promotion, new trade agreements are being finalised with partner countries such as China and India. Moreover, we are implementing a comprehensive Africa Strategy to promote investment and trade and expand our economic space.
We are investing massively in key projects to increase connectivity and meet the infrastructural needs of a high-income economy. A new airport terminal has been built to service a higher number of visitors. We are building a light rail system to address traffic congestion and increase productivity. Major investments are underway to transform the port into a regional hub for transhipment and bunkering. In addition, new investments are being made in the water catchment and distribution network and in electricity production.
These developments require a trained labour force. While the overall unemployment rate has been declining in recent years, unemployment among women and the youth remains at an elevated level. In addition, the labour market is constrained by the ageing population and skills mismatch. To address the expected shrinking of the labour force in view of the ageing population, the retirement age has been extended from 60 to 65 years. Different schemes and training programmes are in place to increase the participation of women in the labour force.
We are implementing a major reform in our education system to address the issue of skills mismatch. In addition we are implementing a number of placement and training programmes to provide job experience to our youth. This is crosscutting with Target 4.4 and will also impact on our efforts to improve on the various targets under SDG5.
Through the Service to Mauritius (ST M) Programme from 2008 to 2018, some 900 graduates and postgraduates had the opportunity to gain valuable job experience.
In 2019, we granted free tertiary education to undergraduates attending public institutions. The aim is to enable more youngsters, especially those who cannot afford, to pursue tertiary education.

Figure 10: Unemployment Rate (in percentage)
	8.0	8.0	7.9


	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016	2017	2018
Source: Statistics Mauritius

Box 5: Empowering SMEssmaller businesses into their efficient value chains. The handicraft sector has been given a new boost and this is benefitting our youth and women.
caw  We have set the objectives to creating an entrepreneurial nation and increasing value addition by the SME sector. In 201 6, we introduced the SME Development Certificate with an income tax holiday for businesses operating in priority sectors. This measure has  created 2,500 new employment and SMEs have invested Rs 1.4 billion (approximately USD 39 million) in different projects. In 201 7, SME Mauritius Ltd was created for  a more coordinated approach to help the  SME sector. We introduce new schemes and facilities to enhance the competitiveness and opportunities for SMEs. For example, we are now encouraging enterprises to integrate
To improve internet connectivity and create a more conducive business environment, we have invested in advanced technological infrastructure, such as the MARS fibre optic cable.
In collaboration with the private sector, training opportunities have been brought to Rodrigues. We have set up the Pöle de Formation Tourisme Rodrigues de VAT EL to ensure that Rodriguans envisaging a career in the tourism industry have the opportunity to receive adequate training in Rodrigues.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Increasing Women Participation
In 201 5, Mauritius introduced the Back-to-Work programme. It targeted female workers, aged 35 and above, who had lost their means of living or had left their jobs for whatever reason.
This programme has been instrumental in reducing female unemployment from 1 1.2 percent in 2016 to 1 0.1 percent in 2018. As at December 2018, of the 3,967 eligible registered women, 1,058 had been placed in private enterprises or with individual employers. Some 54 percent of them were employed on a permanent basis after completing a I-year placement.
2. Empowering the Youth
We introduced the Youth Employment Programme (YEP) in 201 3. The YEP allows unemployed youth to be placed in private companies and public sector to facilitate their transition from education to employment. They are provided with core skills required by different sectors.
As at December 201 8, of the 29,674 young people registered under the YEP, around 73 percent were placed in private companies, of whom 54 percent were females. Furthermore, upon completion of the programme, approximately 50 percent of registered employers in the YEP, have recruited these trainees on a permanent basis. Ultimately, the YEP is contributing to increase the number of people being employed.
3. Innovation and Collaboration with Private Sector in Addressing Skills Mismatch
The Graduate Training for Employment Scheme (GTES) is an innovative measure that we introduced in 201 5/16 to enhance the employability of unemployed graduates. The latter are provided with skills matching the requirements of our industry. The programme is mounted and run in collaboration with the private sector. Government covers the cost of training for each graduate along with a monthly stipend.
The employer has the responsibility to identify the required training providers, mounting appropriate courses, which last between 3 to 1 2 months, and selection of graduates for subsequent placement and employment.
4. Creating an entrepreneurial nation — WORK-FROM-HOME SCHEME
In an attempt to raise productivity and provide new opportunities for the youth while creating a more flexible work environment, the "work-from-home" scheme was introduced in 201 8. This scheme will create some 3,500 new jobs and empower more women, in particular young mothers, to join the labour force.
Appropriate regulations are now enshrined in our law and homeworkers are granted 'Employed' status. They are entitled to paid leaves and benefits similar to employees in the mainstream sectors of activity. Employers are also required to refund any work-related expenses borne by homeworkers.
To further encourage this new mode of employment, we are allowing employers a double deduction from tax, of the wage and salary costs of homeworkers for the first two years. We are also granting them an annual tax credit of 5 percent for three years on investment in the required IT system to facilitate the work-from-home.

The major challenge to the Mauritian economy in terms of labour is how to address the existing skills mismatch. Youth unemployment persists, rising from 23.9 percent in 201 6 to 25.1 percent in 201 8.

While we are encouraging retraining facilities in collaboration with private companies and local universities, especially in the field of ICT, we expect current reforms in the education sector to address the skills mismatch in the long run.
We require more in-depth analysis so as to identify exactly which skills set will enable today's student to be a winner in the future.

With Industry 4.0, it is essential that we increase labour productivity in our industries and in the public sector.
Though the private sector resorts to foreign labour in certain economic sectors, such as agriculture, manufacturing and construction, we continue to face a scarcity of manual workers.
We are currently formulating a National Employment Policy (NEP). The NEP will adopt a coherent and comprehensive approach for the creation of productive employment and decent work for all by taking into consideration the social dimensions of employment.
Policy. It aims at analysing and dealing with the complexity of migration issues in a broader perspective with a view to ensuring better and sustainable living conditions, including measures to address unemployment.

We have developed a Migration and Development

We have to ensure a decent and safe working environment, increase competitiveness of the Mauritian workforce, while ensuring there is no gender gap in our labour market.
We are finalising the elaboration of our second generation Decent Work Country Programme (MDWCP Il). This will create employment through innovation, enhance productivity and improve working conditions by protecting workers' right.


caw





Metro Express - Smart Mauritius on the Move
9
BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE,
PROMOTE INCLUSIVE AND
SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALIZATION
AND FOSTER INNOVATION


INFRASTRUCTURE
Mauritius has never halted its efforts to match its progress with bigger, more resourceful and connected countries. Over time, we have drawn inspiration from good practices abroad and from megaprojects where we have solicited the expertise of friendly countries. The building of a modern society imperatively rests on the setting up of resilient connectivity, sophisticated infrastructure and a transportation system which is efficient and sustainable. That is why we have embarked on a
number of projects which will transform forever our landscape while keeping in mind the sustainability of the country.
For many years, Mauritius has faced acute traffic congestion which is costing us about Rs 4 billion (approximately USD 1 12 million) annually. In 2017 alone, Mauritius had more than half a million of vehicles for a population of 1.3 million. A massive infrastructure upgrading project is underway. The road network in Mauritius is fast changing. We are targeting the addition of 25 km to our existing road network by 2022 with an estimated investment of Rs 1 0 billion (approximately USD 280 million) for new roads, flyovers, bridges and road bypasses. This will immensely facilitate commute and will have a sizeable and positive economic impact.
As part of modernising the country, Mauritius is also building its first light rail transit system which will connect the five major towns on the island, including the Capital. This will reduce travel time. The project which uses clean energy, is safe and secure and supports SDGI 1.
As an Ocean State, Mauritius ambitions to boost ocean activities and modernise its port facilities. Presently the port handles 8 million tonnes of cargo annually. Our vision is to become a transhipment hub in the region, increase bunkering activities
and encourage cruise tourism. We reviewed and updated our Port Masterplan in 201 7 with a new blueprint for infrastructural development. All these measures will boost the economic activity in Mauritius and propel us closer to our economic objective.
INNOVATION IN MANUFACTURING & SMEs
SMEs contribute nearly half of total employment and about 35 percent to the Mauritian GDP. Government fully recognises the crucial part SMEs play in our economic development. We are thus encouraging the creation of innovative SMEs in key sectors such as agriculture, ICT and the oceans. We have earmarked Rs 1 billion (approximately USD 28 million) for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) for a series of schemes which include loan facilities for startups, planters engaging in sheltered farming and operators of organic farms. We have an Enterprise Modernisation Scheme which provides finance lease facilities to MSMEs to modernise their plant and equipment.
We are encouraging SMEs to nurture a culture of innovation. We introduced an SME Innovation Award in 2017 and a National SME Incubator Scheme (NSIS) under which the Government and private sector incubators provide a host of facilities to start-ups.
Manufacturing contributed 12.3 percent to our GDP in 2018. It remains the largest contributor to our economy. The manufacturing sector has been the backbone of our economic success since the 1980s. However, this sector is now facing new challenges and has registered a low growth rate mainly due to intense market competition with low cost producing countries.
We are, therefore, working on sustainable measures that will revamp and green our manufacturing sector. For example, new sectors which rely on precision-driven technology are replacing traditional manufacturing. We are assisting our manufacturing industries in enhancing their export preparedness. Some 223 beneficiaries have taken advantage of the Speedto-Market Schemes, resulting in an increase of 1 0 percent in exports by air to Europe, while 65 companies have benefitted from the Freight Rebate Scheme for exports by sea to Africa.
ICT & INNOVATION
ICT is an integral part of all modern societies. It improves the quality of life of the citizens. Over the past decade, the ICT sector has evolved as a major growth pole in the Mauritian economy. It is currently the 3 rd pillar of our economy. In 201 7, Mauritius ranked 72 nd out of 1 76 countries worldwide on the ICT Development Index and 6th on the G/oba/ Cyber Security Index. The country is also ranked first in Africa in these indices.
We are working relentlessly to encourage ICT use across our society. The success of these measures is resounding. The proportion of individuals using internet in Mauritius has almost doubled over the period 201 0-2018 and broadband penetration was around 87 percent.
To ease the daily life of our citizens and businesses, we introduced a number of measures, including the Data Protection Act 201 7, an information highway (InfoHighway) which allows for secure data sharing among Government agencies and a National Open Data Portal for release of Government open datasets.
Moreover, with the view to accelerating public sector digitalisation efforts to enhance operational effectiveness and efficiency and to better service our citizens, mauritius is implementing its Digital Government Transformation Strategy 20182022. Our Digital Plan sets out an ambitious blueprint with emphasis on Digital Government, ICT infrastructure, Innovation, Talent Management and Cyber Security.
We have also improved ICT connectivity in Rodrigues and Agalega. As we successfully implement new measures to accelerate the connectivity of our people, we are fine-tuning our strategies to ensure the smooth transition of Mauritius into a cyber-island. In 2018, we adopted three strategic documents, Digital Mauritius 2030 Strategic Plan, Digital Government Transformation Strategy 2018-2022 and the Mauritius Artificial Intelligence Strategy. We are initiating our population to new and specialised digital technologies, including Al and Blockchain.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Creation of a Modern, Safe and Efficient Land Transport System - Metro Express


Metro Express Works in Mauritius

The Curepipe to Port Louis corridor is presently in effervescence with the construction of the Metro Express, a 26 km light rail transit system. The project was officially launched in March 201 7. Phase 1 will be operational this year.
The transit system is being implemented with the assistance of the Government of India. Estimated at Rsl 8.8 billion (approximately USD 565 million), it is one of the most ambitious infrastructure projects ever implemented in Mauritius. Around 7,000 new full-time jobs have been created during the construction phase.


caw

This new transport system will reduce the journey time from Curepipe to Port Louis to 41 minutes, making it quicker and more predictable. In line with our commitment for a cleaner environment, the light rail transit system will be fully eco-friendly.
With a view to creating more jobs once the light rail system is operational, we have included the possibility for street vendors to operate around the terminals in a safe, clean and welcoming environment. Through this project, we want to provide greater economic opportunities to our citizens.
2. Improving Connectivity to the Island and Developing a Regional Logistics Hub
Port Development
In 201 7, we reviewed our Port Masterplan and have started work to cement our position as the preferred regional maritime gateway.
We have invested in the extension of the Mauritius Container Terminal berths to 800 m thus strengthening the existing quay. We have deepened the navigational channel to 16.5 m making Port Louis the deepest port in the region capable of accommodating very large vessels. Additional equipment, including seven cranes for loading and uploading of vessels, was also procured, thus improving port productivity. We have also expanded backup facilities to increase terminal capacity from 550,000 TEUs (Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit) to 750,000 TEIJs.
These improvements have allowed Port Louis to handle more transhipment traffic. The bunker traffic increased by almost 36 percent from 404,837 tonnes to 550,241 tonnes in the past three years. The number of cruising ships making calls to Port
Louis increased from 24 to 37 10
Airport Development
Currently, we have more than 20 scheduled airlines that serve some 30 destinations through our international airport. The passenger terminal handles around 1,640 passengers per hour (both arrivals and departures) and has a capacity of 4 million passengers per year. It is operating at 92 percent of its capacity.
We are implementing a series of measures to increase passenger handling capacity to 4.5 million by 2020 and to expand air freight traffic to 65,000 tonnes in 2020. In collaboration with private operators, Mauritius is developing a new Cargo, Freeport and Logistics zone in the airport area. In 2017, an increase in air freight traffic by 18 percent with a freight tonnage of 61,000 was noted.


SSR International Airport, Plaisance

3. ICT Infrastructure in Mauritius and Rodrigues
In terms of infrastructure, the island is already connected to SAFE (South Africa Far East) and LION-I and LION-2 (Lower Indian Ocean Networks) networks. Two more submarine cables will be operational by the first quarter of 2020. All households are now connected to the Fibre-tothe-Home (FTTH) network. In addition, 350 WIFI hotspots are available across Mauritius.
The Mauritius and Rodrigues Submarine (MARS) subsea cable system, launched in February 2019, is the first project to focus on developing connectivity between our islands. The MARS cable connects Rodrigues to the rest of the world and will enable the island to begin its digital transformation and move to a new stage in its economic development.
4. Promoting Innovation, Research and Development


/ÄäÄ
Installing MARS cable in Rodrigues
cawIn May 2019, we organised our second National Research Week for the Higher Education Sector. This provided a platform for over 600 researchers to meet, interact and disseminate their research findings. We have initiated several research schemes to benefit our research community.

Failure rate of small new businesses is high in their initial years. Lack of experience of entrepreneurs and insufficient support mechanisms for start-ups are some of the major bottlenecks faced by SMEs willing to innovate.
We have introduced a National SME Incubator Scheme in partnership with the private sector to support SMEs in their quest for innovation. 32 incubatees were supported through the NSIS. The aim is to reach 1 50 incubatees by 2021.

Our port and airport facilities need upgrading and expansion that will further enhance our connectivity to the rest of the world.
We are currently working closely with the African Development Bank on a techno-economic feasibility study for a new breakwater and an Island Terminal. The project will increase our ability to handle a bigger fleet of vessels.
We are increasing port bunkering opportunities and cruise tourism to Mauritius. Additional fishing port facilities are also being constructed to meet the demands emerging from the exploitation of our EEZ and to transform Port Louis into a major fishing centre.
We aim at increasing passenger terminal handling capacity at our airport to six million by 2030.
68 eaasp



REDUCE INEQUALITY WITHIN AND AMONG COUNTRIES

Our socio-economic progress goes hand in hand with building an inclusive and equitable society where every citizen feels part of the development process and no one is left behind.
We are making special efforts in different sectors so that the fruit of our progress is equally shared among the population. Towards that end, we have implemented a number of programmes to reduce inequality in our society. The 2016 Marshal/ Plan Against Poverty11 goes in that direction as we target 1 1,222 households on the SRM.
In 2017, Government introduced the Negative Income Tax to provide financial support to Iowincome employees deriving emoluments less than or equal to Rs 9,900 (approximately USD 280) per month. Some 75,000 employees benefitted from the scheme in 2017/18.
Mauritius introduced the National Minimum Wage to ensure that all workers are paid above the poverty line and to reduce the gap with the highest paid workers. It has created a new dynamic and increased the purchasing power of those in the lower income bracket. Approximately 1 20,000 workers representing 28 percent of the total labour force are eligible to the minimum wage.
As part of our efforts to institutionalise our fight to reduce inequality in all its forms, an Equal Opportunities Commission has been set up. The Commission is mandated to carry out investigations into alleged cases of discrimination on grounds such as age, caste, colour, creed, ethnic origin, impairment, marital status, place of origin, political opinion, sex and sexual orientation.
Box 6: Findings of the 2017
Household Budget Survey
The average monthly household disposable income increased by 25.1 percent from Rs 29,420 (approximately USD 830) in 201 2 to Rs 36,81 0 (approximately 1000 USD in 201 7.
Income inequality recorded a decrease between 2012 and 201 7. The share of total income going to the 20 percent of households at the lower end of the income range increased from 5.3 percent in 2012 to 5.7 percent in 201 7.
• The Gini coefficient decreased from 0.414 in 2012 to 0.400 in 201 7, showing an improvement in the income distribution.
MIGRATION
In 2018, we developed a Migration and Development Policy, which purports at setting out our strategic vision in dealing with challenges and opportunities related to migration in a holistic and proactive manner. The overall goal is to maximize the positive outcomes and impact of migration for the socio-economic development of Mauritius.
While all Mauritians are eligible for facilities provided by the Government, people living in our Outer Islands are often unaware of these facilities. We have, therefore, set up an Information and Support Desk (ISD) for inhabitants of Outer Islands coming to live in Mauritius since they are most at risk of falling in precarious and vulnerable situations. A facility has also been set up in Rodrigues which provides information on employment, health, social security and education to islanders moving to Mauritius.
On the other hand, Mauritius extends access to the basic facilities such as healthcare and education to non-nationals living and working in Mauritius. As we keep diversifying our economy, we have to resort to foreign labour. Currently, there are around 44,000 migrant workers in Mauritius. They are entitled to these basic facilities.
While we import labour for the manufacturing sector, we have a high number of skilled workers and professionals who are unable to find employment in Mauritius. In view of widening the scope of opportunities for these citizens and for gaining professional experience and training abroad, we have concluded a circular migration programme with countries such as Canada and Italy, amongst others. In addition, we have finalised bilateral MOIJs with Seychelles, France and Qatar. We are also working on agreements with Nepal and Bangladesh.
REDUCING INEQUALITY IN THE REGION
Mauritius is fully aware that progress cannot be achieved alone; it is best achieved with partners in the region. Over the years, Mauritius has engaged in numerous multilateral partnerships to further regional cooperation. Through the Accelerated Program for Economic Integration (APEI), which is supported by the World Bank, we aim at speeding up economic integration by eliminating trade barriers between Mauritius, Seychelles, Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique. We are also encouraging students from our region to study in Mauritius by availing of the Mauritius Africa Scholarship Scheme which we set up in 201 3. So far, 86 students have benefitted from it.
Mauritius has also established an extensive network of bilateral Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) and Investment Protection and Promotion Agreements (IPPAs) to encourage business exchanges with various countries.
We strongly believe in the need to encourage initiatives by entrepreneurs who wish to explore business possibilities in other countries. Progress, after all, matters only when it is an inclusive process. We are assisting our business community to explore opportunities outside Mauritius. For example, the Mauritius Africa Fund (MAF) has a seed capital of Rs 500 million (approximately USD 14 million) to encourage our local businesses invest in mainland Africa. Four MOUs have been signed to develop Special Economic Zones, two of which are with LDCs, namely Madagascar and Senegal. These initiatives will further strengthen our relationship with Africa and encourage economic integration.


caw

BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Empowering the Disabled
The policy of Mauritius rests on integrating the vulnerable segment, in particular, persons with disabilities, into mainstream employment. We are conducting trainings and skills development programmes for those with disabilities. A Training and Employment of Disabled Persons Board was set up in 1986 to act as a facilitator in finding employment and training. We encourage children with disabilities to continue schooling by providing them with a monthly stipend when they join secondary schools. This initiative is in line with our belief that people with disabilities should be supported from an early stage. Since 201 2, we have adopted a legislation for enterprises with 35 or more workers to employ people with disabilities.
2. Enhancing Conditions of Migrant and Foreign Workers
We have reinforced the Special Migrant Workers Unit (SMWU) to enhance its effectiveness and to ensure that our labour legislation is applied indiscriminately towards migrant workers and their fundamental rights are not infringed.
The Unit is also responsible to ensure that migrant workers are employed on terms and conditions which are not less favourab/e than our locals. This is done mainly through verification and vetting of the contract of employment of the migrants prior to their arrival in Mauritius and through routine inspections at their workplace. From July 2017 to January 2019, we conducted some 162 recruitment license inspections.
Our legislation also provides for healthy and safe accommodation for migrant workers, including adequate water supply, electricity, sanitation, cooking and cleaning facilities.
3. Rehabilitation and Resettlement	of Detainees
Since 2013, the Mauritian Prisons Department collaborates with Civil Society, professional organisations and academic institutions in facilitating detainees in their rehabilitation and resettlement. We are providing detainees with new skills. In partnership with the FAREI, our prison has a poultry farm and a slaughtering house to achieve self-sufficiency in eggs and chicken. The private sector is our partner in providing detainees in activities in furniture.
4. Capacity Building Initiatives to Reduce Inequality in the Region
To further economic growth and develop human capacity in our region, Mauritius jointly with the IMF, has set up two regional capacity building institutions, namely the AFRITAC South and the Africa Training Institute (ATI). The AFRITAC South provides technical assistance and support in core macroeconomic and financial management to 1 3 countries in Southern Africa and the West Indian Ocean region. The ATI provides training to participants from 45 Sub-Saharan Africa to develop policymaking capacity and transfer economic skills and best practices in the region. From 2013 to 2018, we contributed around USD 24 million to the two institutions.
We are further promoting South-South Cooperation through the Regional Multidisciplinary Centre of Excellence (RMCE) set up in Mauritius to supplement the activities of the IMF in capacity building. The RMCE provides support to African countries through peer-to-peer exchanges and study tours.
During the period 2013 to 2016, RMCE facilitated nine study tours from Mauritania, Malawi, Gambia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, Djibouti and Burundi. Over the last three years, Mauritius has contributed Rs 14.5 million (approximately USD 400,000) to the RMCE.
72 eaasp
The 201 1 Census shows that approximately 9,500 Rodriguans aged 16 years and over live in Mauritius.
Many of them live in vulnerable areas of Mauritius and are at risk of facing challenges relating to economic integration, social cohesion and unhealthy hygienic living conditions.
While two Information and Support Desks have been set up to support the transition of Rodriguans and others to Mauritius, sustained and further assistance is required to ensure that the newly arrived do not fall into poverty.
The national Migration and Development Policy also supports the development of Rodrigues, including through sustainable mobility opportunities.

Due to an expansion in our economic activities, Mauritius needs more migrant workers for different sectors. However, there are gaps in the recruitment process of migrant workers and there is need for better coordination among different stakeholders involved to ensure that the basic human and employment rights of these workers are not violated.
With the assistance of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), discussions are ongoing to establish G to G agreements that would formalise recruitment of migrant workers. This will drastically minimise the role of recruiting agents.
The issue of migrant workers also features prominently on the agenda of the National Steering Committee that we have set up to combat Trafficking in Persons. Mauritius does not tolerate any form of exploitation. We need to sustain ongoing awareness campaigns along with other measures for workers to know their rights.

73
caw
74 eaasp



Development brings along challenges such as air pollution, increasing waste, degradation of the environment, poor sanitation, housing shortages, traffic jams among others. In Mauritius, we are working relentlessly to address these challenges. The deadly flashflood in March 201 3 was an eye opener of our vulnerability. We are also experiencing more intense tropical cyclones in the region along with extreme weather conditions. As a result careful urban and infrastructure planning have a sense of urgency more than ever before. We need to improve on the resilience of our cities, villages and settlements.
We have adopted a new national development strategy with a more sustainable approach. Our first step for improved management of land surface was a thorough assessment of our land resource. We have built a land database for better development planning. Mauritius set up a Cadastre Unit in 2012 under the Land Administration Valuation and Information Management System (LAVIMS) project to improve planning, land valuation and environmental monitoring. The whole land transaction process has now been computerised in an integrated system.
We have also set up the Land Drainage Authority (LDA) with a mandate to develop a Land Drainage Master Plan. While the mapping exercise is underway, we are already improving existing drain facilities as periodic floods are disrupting the lives of our citizens. Construction of drains in more than 50 flood prone areas across the island is underway.
The busiest part of the island is Port Louis which is our Capital. Despite a number of measures to decentralize the activities and the relocation of many offices out of Port Louis, on a daily basis around 200,000 commuters travel in and out of the Capital. There is also a heavy problem of congestion in the city. Port Louis is in need of an urgent uplifting and a regeneration programme is under implementation. We cannot successfully create sustainable cities and living spaces if we do not benefit from the valued partnership of our stakeholders. We have thus involved the private sector in this regeneration project that will transform the landscape of Port Louis. Residential units will be constructed for young professionals to live and work in the city which will have modern amenities. Our aim is to provide suitable housing to all categories of citizens and turn Port Louis into a more lively city.
We have provided incentives to the private sector under the Smart City Scheme to build sustainable and integrated housing projects. The scheme revolves around the work-live-play concept. The Economic Development Board (EDB), previously known as the Board of Investment, won the United Nations Awards for Promoting Investment in Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 201 7. The EDB portrayed the Uniciti project by Medine Group, which is a private mixed-use smart city project over an extent of 823 acres of land on the West Coast of the island.
Our commitment to preserve national heritage sites is well on track. So far 198 sites around the island, including six in Rodrigues, are on our national heritage list. We are also home to two UNESCO World Heritage Sites - Le Morne Cultural Landscape and the Aapravasi Ghat. Our cultural heritage is rich and we value maintaining our traditions for future generations. The Sega Tipik, the Bhojpuri Geet-Gawai of Mauritius and the Sega Tambour of Rodrigues are inscribed on the List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Disaster Risk Management • Sensitisation and Awareness Raising Campaign
In collaboration with various stakeholders, the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC) and the newly set up Land Drainage Authority (LDA), have developed a sensitisation and awareness campaign on land drainage issues. Since 201 8, a number of initiatives has been introduced under the sensitisation campaign targeting the public at large, vulnerable communities and residents near flood-prone areas.
2. World Heritage Sites - The Aapravasi Ghat & Le Morne Cultural Landscape
The Aapravasi Ghat, originally known as the Immigration Depot, was constructed in 1849 to receive newly arrived indentured labourers, mainly from India to work on the island's sugar estates.
The site stands as a major historic testimony of indentured labour in the 1 9th Century and embodies the success of the Great Experiment that led the British to replicate this system in its colonies around the world.


The Aapravasi Ghat

Since the inscription of the Aapravasi Ghat on the World Heritage List in 2006, Mauritius has taken measures to protect and safeguard the site by adopting a Planning Policy Guidance to regulate development in the buffer zone. Moreover, a Local Economic Development (LED) plan which puts heritage as a driver for development was introduced. The Plan was prepared in consultation with the private sector, including small businesses operating in the buffer zone.
The Le Morne Cultural Landscape, is the second heritage site which is inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Le Morne stands as a symbol of freedom, suffering and sacrifice. This site was used as a shelter by runaway slaves and maroons through the 1 8th and early years of the 1 9th Centuries. This historical site is full of meaning for it witnessed the slaves and maroons who gave up their lives in despair to avoid being captured by their masters. In 2008, we set up the Le Morne Cultural Landscape Management Plan to ensure a sound and sustainable management of Le Morne site. Le Morne Heritage Trust Fund annually undertakes its biodiversity conservation and rehabilitation programme.
3. First Eco-City in Mauritius
We have encouraged the private sector to develop eco-friendly cities. Such a project is the Plaisance Eco-City, located in the South of the island, near the airport.
This sustainable city will include 1,200 homes for the middle-class, a Business Park and a first class Hotel that will be autonomous in terms of electricity and powered by wind turbines and solar panels.
VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW REPORT OF MAURITIUS	77 cawThe Plaisance Eco-city is in line with international sustainability standards, and integrates economic efficiency, social equity and environmental quality. It will create some 1,000 direct and indirect jobs for people from surrounding villages.
This innovative and attractive model will provide present and future generations an improved quality of life as part of our vision for a sustainable Mauritius.
4. Decent Shelter Programme
The Marshal/ Plan Against Poverty noted that approximately 3.6 percent of the urban population lived in slums in 201 1. These slums were mostly overpopulated corrugated iron dwellings, with poor sanitation and limited access to potable water.
With a view to improving people's living conditions,
Government introduced in 2015 the Decent Shelters programme for the construction of mixed housing developments that favours the integration of people who are socially and economically disadvantaged. These housing projects include adequate road infrastructure, utility supplies as well as play and open spaces for improved life quality of its inhabitants.
Mauritius also provides financial assistance to needy households for the casting of roof slabs.


OPPORTUNITIESCHALLENGES
There is a need to create a thriving sustainable economic sector around the world heritage sites while enhancing the protection of our heritage.Forthcoming cultural projects are expected to bring in value to existing infrastructure, including the buffer zone around the Aapravasi Ghat. This will turn Port Louis into a revitalized city in terms of culture, economy and living experience. We are planning the creation of a Cultural Creative District in the bufferzone of the Aapravasi Ghat.


Though the LAVIMS project has beenThere is need to set up a shared Geographic Information Systemimplemented and Planning Policy(GIS) platform and/or updated mapping system to monitor andGuidance are in place, information on land use remains scatteredanalyse land use changes.across institutions.A State Land Register is being set up to provide a modern and updated land information system. This system will reduce turnaround time for delivery of services, thus increasing efficiency and productivity.78 eaasp
RESPONSIBLE
CONSUMPTION
AND PRODUCTION
Hydroponic Farm in the South

Mauritius has recognised the urgency to shift to responsible consumption and sustainable production practices. We have put in place policies and regulations that promote environment friendly practices.	

Following the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development, Mauritius benefitted from the support of UNEP as a pilot country to develop its National Programme on Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) in 2008. The latter encompassed 44 projects which focused on sustainable practices such as efficiency in energy and water consumption, an integrated approach to solid waste management and improving resource management in public sector. 
Government has also introduced a series of initiatives to influence consumer behaviour, including the banning of plastic bags and encouraging the use of energy efficient electronic appliances.
As the SCP paved the way to accelerate our transition to an eco-efficient economy, production patterns changed and adapted themselves. Adoption of innovative and creative solutions in agricultural production patterns spurred productivity and selfsufficiency. In addition, with the enactment of the Pesticides Act in 2018, the farming community has strict parameters for the level of pesticide it can use. This is producing healthier crops for consumers. Furthermore, Government provides financial and fiscal incentives to support farmers in investing in sustainable production systems such as rainwater harvesting, sheltered farming, hydroponics and aquaponics. Government has provided around 27 hectares of land to planters at Britannia for bio-production.
Box 7: Leading Practices in SCP
A number of domestic electrical appliances are required under the Energy Efficiency Act 201 1 to have energy labels affixed. 
In collaboration with Business Mauritius, some 88 audits were conducted under the Programme National d'Efficacité Energétique (PNEE) since its implementation in 201 5.
The Building Control Act incorporates sustainability requirements that encourage water and energy conservation and sound onsite waste management. A Building Rating System is also in place to ensure compliance.


80

The tourism industry is also adopting SCP practices. The strategy of hotels revolves around the reduce-reuse-recycle concept in combating food wastage. Thus, where hotels are unable to eliminate food wastage, the surplus is either distributed to disadvantaged families or recycled into energy by producing biogas. NGOs like FoodWise, les Cuisines Solidaires (Solidarity Kitchen) and Manzer Partazer (Eat and Share) are collaborating with the hotel industry to distribute the surplus food to needy families.
We introduced the Stock Exchange of Mauritius Sustainability Index (SEMSI) in 201 5. It spurred interests from private companies to have more meaningful engagement towards society, the economy and the environment. The SEMSI also offers a useful tool for domestic and international investors who are sensitive to responsible investment in frontier markets.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Encouraging Use of Eco-Friendly Vehicles
With a dual aim of encouraging the use of ecofriendly vehicles and reducing consumption of fossil fuels, we lowered existing excise duty on hybrid motor cars, between 1,001 to 1,600 cc, from 55 percent to 25 percent in 201 6. In the same year, Government removed all excise duty on electric cars of up to 1 80 kW making them more accessible to the public. Since its introduction, the number of hybrid cars registered has doubled. On the other hand, that of electric cars tripled over two years.

Figure 11: Evolution of Eco-friendly Cars
33

	2016	2017	2018
Source: Statistics Mauritius

2. Waste Management
While opportunities exist locally for the recovery and disposal of hazardous wastes such as waste oil, e-wastes, healthcare and asbestos wastes, it is not economically viable to process other types of hazardous chemical wastes. To address this issue, and in line with our obligations to international Conventions (Basel, Bamako and Minamata), Government has set up an interim storage facility for hazardous wastes at La Chaumiöre, Bambous.
cawThe facility is designed to store up to 1,700 tonnes of hazardous chemical wastes from laboratories and industries. It is also equipped with an on-site laboratory, quarantine and repackaging unit before exporting to licensed facilities for recovery and disposal. So far, around 180 tonnes of hazardous chemical wastes have been collected from more than 200 public and private organisations.
3. Greening of the Tourism Industry
Mauritius is set to acquire the Green Destination status by 2030. In this regard, we are implementing a series of strategies and policies set out in the Tourism Strategic Plan 2018-2021. The Plan advocates a skill-intensive and technology-driven model of tourism development.
It is mandatory for hotel promoters to adopt ecofriendly and energy-saving practices, such as rainwater harvesting systems, use of economic bulbs and the use of renewable energy. It is also mandatory for hotels with at least 50 rooms and located on the seaside to provide for a desalination plant, while hotels with more than 50 rooms must also be equipped with a wastewater treatment plant, if public sewerage is not available. We are also greening the tourism industry by working closely with tour operators to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the tourism value chain.

ISLÅND
Sustainable Tourism
M A U R I T I U S
Source: Tourism Authority
4. Centre de Formation Agricole Frére Remy in Rodrigues
The Centre is considered as a model for SCP practices and eco-entrepreneurship development. It provides young people from low-income groups having academic difficulties, an opportunity to undertake vocational training in agriculture, pisciculture, apiculture and farming. The aim is to alleviate poverty through agricultural projects.


Sustainable Agricultural Practices at Centre De
Formation Agricole Frere Remy, Rodrigues


Waste management is another major challenge. Due to the continued increase in solid waste, the lifespan of the Mare Chicose landfill is rapidly shortened.

We need to find alternative solutions, for both solid and hazardous wastes including possible new sites for waste disposal.
In addition, we are exploring the possibility of increasing the capacity of Mare Chicose by at least 5 years. We are also identifying additional land for the disposal of waste.

Recycling is at its initial stages. We have attempted to stimulate industrial symbiosis through the establishment of a recycling industry and a circular economy. However, lack of legislation and adequate facilities are obstacles that we should overcome.
To promote the recycling practices in industries and households, we are developing a comprehensive Waste Recycling Framework.

83 eaasp

84 eaasp
CLIMATE
ACTION
Mangrove Plantation

Climate change is seriously undermining SIDS and Mauritius is no exception. According to the 201 8 World Risk Report, Mauritius is among the countries most exposed to natural hazards (1 0th ) and is ranked 1 6th with the highest disaster risk. The effects of climate change are visible. Highintensity cyclones have become more frequent in our region and changing rainfall pattern with flashfloods which are now common. In March 201 3, Port Louis came to a standstill with an unprecedented flashflood where eleven people lost their lives. It also caused serious damage to infrastructure and property.
Due to the changing climatic conditions, Mauritius has embarked on a number of initiatives to increase its resilience and level of preparedness. We are investing significantly in mitigation and adaptation measures. Around 2.15 percent of our GDP annually is invested in both adaptation (77 percent) and mitigation (23 percent) measures31 Mauritius has also adopted a coordinated approach to the management of disaster risk through the establishment of a National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre (NDRRMC). Rodrigues has its own Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Centre. We have also set up Community Disaster Response Teams in floodprone areas to assist vulnerable communities.
Sea level rise is a serious threat to SIDS and low-lying areas. In Mauritius, we have observed an accelerated rise at the rate of 5.6 mm per year compared to world average of 3.2 mm per year. Local communities are particularly affected. Mauritius is the first SIDS to have a fully operational Early Warning System for incoming Storm and Tidal Surge as part of its preparedness mechanism. Moreover, we have set up the first fully equipped Climate Change Refuge Centre in the Indian Ocean. The Centre can accommodate 1,000 persons in Quatre Soeurs, a region prone to landslides, sea level rise and flooding.
Mauritius is also working closely with friendly countries to enhance its level of preparedness in the face of climate change. For many years, there was serious need of a sophisticated weather forecast radar which could calculate the volume of water in a cloud mass. We have now set up such a radar with the assistance of Japan at Trou aux Cerfs.


New S-Band Doppler at Trou aux Cerfs



3 1 Tracking Public Sector Environment Expenditure, UNDP and Ministry of Finance & Economic Development, 2018


Mauritius is making significant efforts to adhere to its international commitments. Although we are among the lowest emitters of greenhouse gases at 0.01 percent, we were among the first countries to have signed and ratified the Paris Agreement. We are also working towards the implementation of recommendations under the Samoa Pathway, the UNFCCC and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction.
Mauritius has pledged, in its Nationally Determined Contributions, to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 30 percent by 2030. We have in place several schemes to promote renewable energies, re-use and recycling (composting) for a low carbon development pathway. We aim to increase the renewable energy share on the grid by 35 percent by 2025.
We recognise that plastic debris, both on land and in our sea, is a major environmental hazard. Rodrigues banned the use of plastic bags in 2014 and we did same in Mauritius in 2016. Those in breach whether buying, manufacturing, or importing plastic can face anything from a fine to imprisonment. We have already noticed a remarkable change in the mindset of consumers and producers. This has opened up windows of opportunities for our local entrepreneurs to aim at eco-friendly and green alternatives.
Mauritius is mainstreaming climate change in the development agenda of local authorities. A Climate Change Charter has been formulated for local authorities since 201 5, under which urgent adaptation actions are being taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at community level. Eco-friendly concepts are taken into consideration while designing and implementing infrastructural and landscaping projects.
As tourism is a major pillar of our economy, Mauritius is mindful of its terrestrial and marine ecosystems. Over the last few decades, the width of our beaches has been eroded by 20 metres in some locations. In parallel, coral bleaching is a real problem impacting on coral biodiversity and fish species in our lagoons. In 201 7, we introduced a Cora/ Culture Training Programme, allowing local fishermen communities to rehabilitate coral reefs around the island. We are also implementing beach and coastal conservation plans along fourteen priority sites.
We are reinvigorating environmental education and sensitisation to achieve environmental sustainability. Mauritius established a Climate Change Information Centre (CCIC) in 2013 and has developed a Toolkit containing 1 1 1 Actions to help Combat Climate Change in Mauritius. Some 600 youth leaders and 750 teachers of primary and secondary schools were trained under the Africa Adaptation Programme on Climate Change Initiatives. This goes in line with our commitment under indicator 13.3.
Despite all these measures, Mauritius cannot afford to become complacent as the effects of climate change are linked to our existence. The National Environment Fund has been recently revamped to mobilise resources for environment projects which are a national development priority. We have been able to access finance from the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and our development partners. Moreover, Mauritius hosts the Commonwealth Climate Finance Access Hub which receives and manages requests for capacity building and technical assistance to secure climate finance on behalf of Commonwealth Member States. Mauritius is also a member of the Commonwealth Clean Ocean Alliance which is working to bring sustainable solutions to marine pollution. For example, the Alliance is actively campaigning for the elimination of all single-use plastic waste.

87
caw
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Early Warning System (EWS) for Incoming Storm and Tidal Surge
A fully-automated Early Warning System has been developed and implemented for Mauritius, Rodrigues and Agalega. Through this project, the coastal communities of our islands are able to evacuate in a timely and safe manner in case of predicted extreme water levels. The Early Warning System has a 3-days probabilistic and 6-hours deterministic capability for storm and tidal surges. We have carried out training and capacity building for staff operating the EWS. The local communities in Quatre Soeurs, where the Climate Change Refuge Centre has been set up, are fully trained to undertake evacuation in case of emergency.



Tsunami Simulation at Community Level

2. National Multi-Hazard Emergency Alert System
We have launched a National Multi-Hazard Early Warning and Emergency Alert System (EWEAS) with a Common Alerting Protocol which is a standard message format designed for all media. To ensure that our citizens and tourists obtain realtime information, alerts, warnings and advisories in times of emergencies and disasters, we have developed an Emergency Alert App, downloadable on Play store and App store. The application was awarded the 201 9 Champion at the World Summit on Information Society.
3. Creating Awareness and Sensitisation Through Bis Lamer (Sea Bus)
Bis Lamer (Sea Bus) is an innovative classroomon-wheel approach to create awareness around climate change. It was set up in 2014 under the Adaptation Fund in collaboration with the Reef Conservation and Rogers Foundation. The aim of this venture is to create public awareness on marine science and environmental issues, especially for students, youth, fishermen, boat operators and the public at large. To date, around 1 7,000 people have been sensitised.
4. Community Participation at Grand Sable and Quatre Soeurs
The Community Participation project was a joint collaboration between local communities, Government and the United Nations (UN). This project has led to the plantation of 20,000 mangrove plants, sensitisation campaigns in primary schools and at community level along with the cultivation of vetiver, cassava, medicinal plants and seaweed as alternative income-generating activities. It aimed at empowering women on alternative incomegenerating activities and helped them mitigate the challenges of climate change while sustaining their livelihood. The project was the winner of the Island Bright Spot Award, as part of the Global Island Partnership 2013 Solution Search, out of 37 countries. It was also recognised by the UN as an excellent example of innovative solutions to develop economic opportunities.

eaasp

identified in the Mauritius Nationally Determined vulnerabilities should be fully supported to have Contributions (NDC) is a major challenge. first access to green funds.

There is a lack of specialised technical capacity to address the impact of climate change and limited access to technology.
Capacity building in vulnerability assessment and new technology, for example, up-to-date modelling and downscaling tools are required to better enhance climate change preparedness.
We need to upscale the incentives given to the private sector and individuals for them to invest in energy efficient, water saving and RE projects in line with our NDC.

We do not have access to historical and disaggregated data for research and policy formulation.We need more Research and Development (R&D) and technology transfer in the area of climate change.
New and innovative technologies are required in adaptation and mitigation to climate change.89
caw
90 eaasp



Exploring Underwater off the Coast of Grand Bay

Mauritius is home to a rich marine life, beautiful sandy beaches and fringing coral reefs. Mauritius has an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of approximately 2.3 million km 2. An additional expanse of extended continental shelf area of approximately 400,000 km 2 is co-managed with Seychelles, following a joint submission made by the two countries to the United Nations in 201 1.
The Maritime Zone of Mauritius is largely unexplored and this offers untapped economic potential. We are committed to harnessing this potential and maximize opportunities from our oceans to make it a pillar for future growth. This sector already represents over 1 0.5 percent of our national GDP, accounting for 20,000 jobs, excluding employment created by coastal tourism.
Three established sectors namely coastal tourism, seaport related activities and the seafood hub make up 90 percent of the GDP for the Ocean Economy pillar. Port infrastructure development, sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, offshore renewable energy, marine ICT and capacity building are investment opportunities for the future.
Mauritius faces multifold challenges in the ocean sector. Marine pollution, ocean acidification and marine debris are among the major problem areas. In 2017, Government initiated a number of projects to address these concerns. The Oceanic Carbonate Chemistry Observatory was set up to monitor changes in trends and patterns of oceanic carbonate chemistry systems. Through this project, Mauritius is a participant in the GOA-ON (Global Ocean Acidification Observing Network) initiative which comprises more than 90 countries.
We have set up a Department for Continental Shelf, Maritime Zones Administration & Exploration (CSMZAE) to ensure that Mauritius has a prudent and responsible approach in exploring and developing the full potential of its maritime zones. A strategic focus of the Department is to develop and implement a Marine Spatial Plan for the maritime zones.
Mauritius has set up a Coordinating Committee for the elaboration of Marine Spatial Planning (MSP) in accordance with SDG14. We have included the private sector and the Civil Society in this Committee. To conserve marine biodiversity, Government has established a system of Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) comprising fishing reserves, marine parks and marine reserves in the waters around Mauritius and Rodrigues.
A 'marine protected area' was purportedly established unilaterally by the United Kingdom in 201 0 around the Chagos Archipelago which forms an integral part of the territory of Mauritius. An Arbitral Tribunal constituted under Annex Vll to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) ruled that in establishing the 'MPA' around the Chagos Archipelago, the United Kingdom breached its obligations under Articles 2(3), 56(2) and 194(4) of UNCLOS. The United Kingdom has so far not rescinded the 'MPA' although it has been held to be illegal. As the coastal State in relation to the Chagos Archipelago, Mauritius will give serious consideration to creating its own MPA around the Archipelago with the support of relevant partners.
Mauritius relies heavily on its tourism industry which is its third most important economic pillar. The contribution of tourism stands at 8.6 percent of our GDP. In 2018, tourist arrivals reached 1.4 million. Mauritius is mostly known for beach tourism. The protection of our beaches and marine ecosystem is a key component of our economic plan. We have introduced a Master Plan for the zoning and management of our lagoons to enhance safety and security at sea and protect our marine ecosystem.
92
cawWe have a vibrant fisheries sector which sustains the livelihood of fishermen families. The Indian Ocean region holds the second largest stock of tuna resources. Industrial fishing is an important economic activity in our region, and we have been able to develop an important seafood industry. Mauritius is a major exporter of canned tuna to foreign markets and this represents about 20 percent of national exports. The turnover of the fisheries sector in Mauritius in 201 8 was Rs 31 billion (approximately USD 870 million) and increased activities in seafood processing and value addition, transhipment, and marine aquaculture sectors are expected to grow in the future. Mauritius has adhered to various international conventions with respect to the conservation and management of marine resources. As a member of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), Mauritius has always supported resolutions which promote the sustainability of marine resources.
An Aquaculture Master Plan was elaborated in 2007 for the sustainable development of aquaculture in Mauritius and 31 potential sites for farming activities have been identified. Currently, several marine aquaculture projects are being implemented. This will also strengthen our food security in line with SDG2.
We have reinforced our legal framework through the imposition of measures whereby there is a closed season for net fishery. Furthermore, net fishers are encouraged to relinquish their nets through a voluntary buy back scheme. These measures are in line with our efforts to protect and conserve marine resources and coastal ecosystems. In addition we have set up a Port State Control Unit in our freeport zone for the monitoring, control and surveillance of fishing activities in our lagoon and EEZ. This is an important step in our endeavour to combat Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing.
We have taken the lead in the Western Indian Ocean region to combat piracy and other transnational organized crimes and to keep our territory and surrounding areas safe. In 201 7, a Maritime Security Conference was jointly organised by Mauritius and the IOC. This has now become an annual feature.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Marine Protected Areas
Mauritius has designated MPAs to protect the marine ecosystem. Mauritius and Rodrigues, combined have eleven fishing reserve areas and six marine reserves where fishing is prohibited. There are six Fishing Reserves and two Marine Parks in mainland Mauritius. In Rodrigues, we have five Fisheries Reserve Areas, four Marine Reserves and a multiple use Marine Protected Area called the South East Marine Protected Area.
2. Public-Private Partnership to Propagate Mangroves
A mangrove propagation programme was started in 1995 to mitigate the drastic decline of mangroves and sensitise the public on the contribution of mangroves in the preservation of the marine ecosystem. To date, nearly 400,000 mangroves have been planted which cover almost 20 hectares of coastal area. Air Mauritius, our national flight carrier, initiated the propagation of some 600 mangrove propagules at the Pointe D'Esny Ramsar site.


Mangrove Propagation Programme


VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW REPORT OF MAURITIUS	
caw
3. Community Led project in Coral Reef	Restoration
The deterioration of coral reefs around the world is due to many factors including climate change. To rehabilitate degraded coral reefs, we are implementing a three-year community based coral culture project which aims at building capacity of the coastal communities in this activity and reef rehabilitation techniques. This helps empower artisanal fishermen to engage in alternate economic activites such as coral farming.
Coral Farms in Mauritius Lagoon

4. Sustainable Management of Resources
Mauritius has strict fishing regulations. The mesh and gear size of nets are regulated; quota system are applied for certain fish species and a licensing system restricts the number of fishing boats and vessels.
In 201 2, an island-wide closed season for octopus fishing was introduced in Rodrigues and following its success, this initiative was replicated in Mauritius. Closure of octopus fishery is from 1 5 August to 15 October which coincides with the spawning season of octopus. This has led to increased catches and bigger sized octopus.

Scarce financial capacity and lack of skills and technology for exploring, studying andBilateral and Multilateral partnerships are required to support sustainable management of our marine areas.utilising the immense potential offered by the marine environment.

Continued effect of climate change on the coral reef ecosystem undermines the restoration and conservation efforts.We have set up a National Coral Reef Network in 2018. Its objective is to enhance collaboration and consultation for conservation of the coral reef system. This will provide us with an opportunity to carry out research on coral species which are more climate resistant and fastgrowing to rehabilitate degraded areas.

There is lack of monitoring capability and facilities for the marine ecosystem andThere is need to establish facilities in remote islands.species on remote Outer Islands such as StA permanent station can be set up on these islands forBrandon.regular monitoring.We have to rely on opportunistic researchIncreased regional coordination and participation incruises to provide information, especially in Outer Islands.surveillance missions.
eaas,
ON LAND
Black River Gorges National Park

PROTECT, RESTORE AND PROMOTE
SUSTAINABLE USE OF TERRESTRIAL
ECOSYSTEMS, SUSTAINABLY MANAGE
FORESTS, COMBAT DESERTIFICATION,
AND HALT AND REVERSE LAND
DEGRADATION AND HALT	1
BIODIVERSITY LOSS


Mauritius harbours a rich and diverse endemic fauna and flora. Of the 691 species of indigenous flowering plants in Mauritius, 315 are unique. Mauritius has been designated by the IIJCN as a Centre of Plant Diversity and we are part of the Madagascar and Indian Ocean Islands biodiversity hotspot. Mauritius has a high level of endemism with 39 percent of its plants, 80 percent of nonmarine birds, 80 percent of reptiles, and 40 percent of bat species reported as native. We have set up conservation programmes, some of which are success stories such as the conservation of the Pink Pigeon, Kestrel, Echo Parakeet and passerine birds. The Mauritius Kestrel (Falco punctatus), once the rarest falcon in the world, was on the brink of extinction due to Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) poisoning with only four birds remaining in 1974. Today we pride ourselves on the conversation efforts that have led to the increase in the Mauritius Kestrel population.
T h e recent Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) has concluded that one million species face extinction because of human actions. Everyone must contribute to reverse this trend. The private sector, NGOs and academic institutions are important stakeholders in this process. The partnership established between all stakeholders has been crucial for conservation efforts in Mauritius. For example, the MCB which is the largest private commercial bank in the country, announced its partnership with the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation (MWF) through a substantial financing of bird recovery projects. This includes a three-year funding scheme to protect four endemic species (Echo Parakeet, Pink Pigeon, Günther's gecko and the Round Island Boa).
Trees and forests play a major role in absorbing carbon dioxide and providing clean air in terms of oxygen. Unfortunately the total area of remaining forest cover on mainland Mauritius is approximately 25 percent out of which 31 percent is privately owned. Given limited land resources and the often conflictual relationship between economic development and conservation imperatives, expanding and sustaining an adequate tree cover remains a challenge for SIDS like Mauritius.
Over the years we have experienced changes to our ecosystem through anthropogenic activities such as human settlements. The loss and the degradation of natural habitats threaten the existence of many species and the sustainability of ecosystems. Development activities in general, combined with the introduction of invasive species of plants and animals, have had a disastrous effect on our native flora and fauna. We are undertaking restoration programmes to control invasive species such as Chinese guava (Psiadium cattleianum) plants in our forests including in the Black River Gorges National Park. The park is the largest protected area in Mauritius.
The Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Parks Act 201 5 was enacted to enhance the conservation and management of terrestrial biodiversity including protected areas and to address the problem of invasive species. The Act also regulates trade in wildlife in compliance with international obligations under the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES). Moreover, at the point of entry at the seaport and airport, we have put in place strict surveillance and enforcement measures for combating illegal trade of protected animals, plants and their by-products.
As our wetlands are rich in biodiversity, we are paying special attention to our obligations and commitments under the Ramsar Convention. We have three designated Ramsar sites, which are wetlands of international importance because of their biodiversity. For instance, the Rivulet Terre Rouge Estuary Bird Sanctuary is a refuge for hundreds of migratory birds which mainly visit us yearly from the northern hemisphere. It supports a unique flora and fauna biodiversity and provides important climate change mitigation functions such as flood control, sediment trapping and shoreline stabilisation.
We are working closely with local communities, Civil Society and the private sector to preserve our natural heritage for future generations. In Rodrigues, a collaborative project, namely "Forét Communautaire" is underway at Mt Limon bringing together the local community, NGOs and the Rodrigues Commission of Environment and Forest. Through this project some 50,000 endemic plants have been planted.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Conservation Status of Endemic birds
Mauritius is seen as a leader in conservation. The recovery of the Kestrel, Pink Pigeon and Echo Parakeet has put Mauritius on the world conservation map. Following decades of invasive species control and habitat restoration, including captive breeding programme, the Mauritius Pink Pigeon was downlisted from Critically Endangered to Vulnerable in November 2018. This was the outcome of the close collaboration between the National Parks and Conservation Service, MWF and the Gerald Durrell Endemic Wildlife sanctuary. In addition, positive trends have been registered for four endemic species which have been downlisted on Il-JCN Red List of Threatened Species. They are Psittacula eques, Foudia rubra, Foudia f/avicans and Acrocepha/us rodericanus.
2. Tree Planting Campaign in Collaboration with NGOs/Private Sector
Mauritius has embarked on a nationwide campaign to plant 1 00,000 trees annually from 2016 to 2020. This massive tree planting initiative will help mitigate the negative impact of climate change by increasing our carbon sinks. In addition, it will create habitat and biodiversity corridors. As the country is a tourist destination this campaign will also significantly increase the country's green cover and beautify our landscape.
A total of 205,982 plants have been planted under the national tree planting campaign by schools, socio-cultural organisations, NGOs and the public.


Mauritius Pink Pigeon


97
caw
3. Cross-Sector Collaboration
Ile aux Aigrettes
Ile Aux Aigrettes is a small islet surrounding Mauritius and a designated Nature Reserve. It is located at 850 m from the South East Coast of Mauritius and harbours a relic of native coastal vegetation. It is managed by the MWF in collaboration with The Forestry Service. Prior to 1 986, the island vegetation was heavily degraded with invasive species. The islet has been leased to MWF which is restoring the coastal ecosystem and low land native species.
Vallée de Ferney
Vallée de Ferney is a privately-owned forest and a wildlife reserve located in the north of Mahebourg. As one of the nature refuges on the island, Vallée de Ferney is home to a partially rehabilitated rainforest with a large number of plant species, most of which, are endangered or vulnerable. The valley is historically important as it is the place where several species were rediscovered after they were thought extinct. The forest is managed for ecotourism by the Vallée de Ferney Conservation Trust Fund, a partnership between the Government and the private company, CIEL Ltd. It is open to the public for them to appreciate the indigenous biodiversity of Mauritius.
Vallée de Ferney

ECONOMIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PUSH-PULL
Fruit Bats (Pteropus niger)
The Mauritius fruit bat (Pteropus niger), also commonly referred as the Greater Mascarene flying fox, is endemic to Mauritius. Given its native status, this unique mammal was classified as an "Endangered" species (IUCN Status). Mauritius has already lost two fruit bat species due to cyclones, habitat loss and hunting.
However, over the years, the Mauritius fruit bat population has evolved considerably across the island. The exponential growth of bats has become a major concern for our fruit growers since the bats cause significant damage and economic loss to commercial fruit farms. Bats are perceived as a "fruit pest". Subsidising the costs of nets to orchard growers and backyard tree owners has not been very successful in preventing economic loss for fruit growers.
A Special Technical Committee set up under the Native Terrestrial Biodiversity and National Park Act 2015 recommended temporary measures to curb the bat population so as to limit the damage caused. Following the IUCN review of the conservation status of the species from Vulnerable to Endangered, we are exploring alternate solutions to the bat problem.


Mauritius Fruit Bat (Pteropus niger)

Export of Live Long Tailed Macaques for Non-Human Primates Biomedical Research
Mauritius supplies non-human primates for biomedical research. On average, we export around 7,000 live macaques annually to European countries and the USA. International organisations which are opposed to vivisection and the use of animals for biomedical research are often critical of Mauritius. In this regard, we ensure that the conditions under which the captive breeding centres operate are in compliance with international norms. We have also imposed strict conditions for these animals to be transported in humane conditions.

Species and native habitats in Mauritius remain under threat from both invasive alien species and development pressures. Limited funding and scarce capacity also hamper effective protected area management.
Management of protected areas needs to be strengthened and protected areas need to be expanded to be representative of all ecosystem types. Further, there is need towards greater coherence in the management of these areas.

Mauritius is one of the most vulnerable countries in terms of natural disasters and climate change. The impact of climate change adds pressure on our natural ecosystem and poses major threats to the Mauritian biodiversity.
Investment in the restoration of specifically freshwater biodiversity and native habitats will enhance resilience and support the ecological ability of Mauritius to deal with climate change.






PROMOTE PEACEFUL AND INCLUSIVE
SOCIETIES FOR SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT, PROVIDE ACCESS TO
JUSTICE FOR ALL AND BUILD EFFECTIVE,
ACCOUNTABLE AND INCLUSIVE
INSTITUTIONS AT ALL LEVELS


Mauritius is a sovereign democratic state island of approximately 1.3 million people of different race, culture and faith, living in a spirit of unity, mutual respect and tolerance. These values have upheld the process of nation building. The country was ranked 20th in the world and 1 st in Sub-Saharan Africa on the 2018 Global Peace Index.
The Constitution of the Republic of Mauritius is the supreme law of the country and any law which is contrary to any constitutional provision is to be declared null and void. The Constitution rests on two fundamental tenets which are the rule of law and the principle of separation of powers between the legislature, the executive, and the judiciary. Chapter Il of the Constitution guarantees each Mauritian citizen their fundamental rights and freedoms. These fundamental rights and freedoms are largely inspired from the European Convention on Human Rights and include, inter alia, the right to life and to personal liberty, protection from slavery and forced labour, from inhuman treatment, from discrimination, from deprivation of property, freedom of conscience, of expression, of assembly and association, of movement and protection for the privacy of home. The Constitution makes provision under Section 1 7 for an aggrieved party whose rights under Chapter Il of the Constitution have been, are being or are likely to be contravened to seek redress in the Supreme Court. In its quest to provide access to justice for all, the Constitution which has been published in Braille has been made available to relevant NGOs and is readily available in public libraries.
Apart from being vital for the functioning of a democratic system of government, the independence of the Judiciary, as guaranteed by the Constitution, empowers the Courts to uphold the Rule of Law and to act as guardian of the Fundamental Rights entrenched in the Constitution as well as to ensure and enforce good governance. The Judiciary of Mauritius was ranked 25th on the Judicial Effectiveness aspect of the Heritage Foundation's 2019 index of Economic Freedom. We have also been ranked 34th on the Judicial Independence component of the Global Competitiveness Index in 2018.
Mauritius is a party to major human rights related conventions and treaties. The country has several nationals serving on human rights treaty bodies in recognition of the importance attached to the observance of human rights in the country. The country is committed to ensuring that its national legislation is fully compliant with international human rights provisions and has always ensured that it complies with its reporting obligations under the major human rights instruments. These international human rights norms are incorporated in the domestic legal system and Mauritian Courts also refer to international human rights treaties as well as international jurisprudence in their own judgments.
Legislation - A few enactments from a wide array of legislative measures adopted over the past recent years are as follows: The Independent Police Complaints Commission Act which was proclaimed in April 2018 provides for the investigation into complaints, other than acts of corruption or money laundering offences, made against police officers in the discharge of their functions. The Criminal Code was amended in 2018 to provide for harsher penalties for the offence of stirring up racial hatred and further provides that the use of, inter a/ia, the internet and electronic means to commit the offence is specifically prohibited. The Extradition Act dating back to 1970 was repealed and replaced by new legislation in 201 7 to make better provision for the extradition of persons from and to Mauritius. It simplifies extradition procedures. The Equal Opportunities Act was amended in 201 7 to provide for the prohibition of discrimination in employment on the grounds of a person's criminal record, both at recruitment and promotion level where a person's criminal record is not relevant to the nature of the employment for which that person is being considered. The law was also amended to shift the burden of proof onto the employer to show that a discrimination on ground of criminal records is relevant. The Protection from Domestic Violence Act was also amended in 2016 to enhance the protection of victims of domestic violence.
Institutions - A Ministry dedicated to Justice, Human Rights and Institutional Reforms (MJHRIR) was set up in September 201 7. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), set up in 2001 under the Protection of Human Rights Act 1998, undertakes enquiries into complaints alleging breaches of civil and political rights referred to in Chapter Il of the Constitution against public bodies and members of the police force. The National Preventive Mechanism Division focuses on prison visits and the elaboration of recommendations regarding the improvement of the treatment and conditions of persons in detention. The Police Complaints Division, designated to investigate complaints against members of the police force and to enhance public confidence in the effectiveness of the police complaints system, has been replaced by the Independent Police Complaints Commission.
Mechanisms - The implementation of the National Human Rights Action Plan 2012-2020 is closely monitored and, so far, about 90% of the actions recommended therein have been implemented although in differing stages. A National Mechanism for Reporting and Follow-Up (NMRF) has been set up as per the recommendations of the Office of the Commissioner for Human Rights. NMRF has become, inter alia, the platform for consultations with NGOs and Civil Society on a regular basis. This new framework aims at ensuring that Human Rights obligations are fully met, periodic reports and mid-term Review/Progress Reports are submitted in a timely manner after thorough consultations with all parties concerned. Furthermore, it ensures a better coordination amongst Ministries in respect of the implementation of recommendations and decisions and enables a complete monitoring of Human Rights issues.
Measures	The general administration and
functioning of the courts have been and are being subject to a wide range of reforms to ensure an even better and prompter administration of justice thereby ensuring that no individual, group, or body be deprived of its rights on account of justice maladministration or inordinate delays. Some of the main measures are as follows: (i) New divisions of the Supreme Court were created to help clear the backlog of cases (inter alia the Family, Mediation and Commercial Divisions); (ii) Reforms are ongoing and the creation of a new Court of Appeal within the Judicial system is under consideration; (ii) In line with the Bail Act, the Bail and Remand Court located in Port Louis is now operational seven days a week including public holidays; (iv) the Law Practitioners' Act provides that Continuing Professional Development (CPD) Programme consisting of ongoing professional training be dispensed by the Institute of Judicial and Legal Studies to all law practitioners. Training and lectures are also dispensed to members of the Judiciary (v) the Supreme Court website provides free access to any person, to updated legislation and case law.
The new Supreme Court Building project which has been funded by the Government of India is expected to be ready by end 2019. The building will house all divisions of the Supreme Court. The new supreme court project will comprise namely: a modern computerised revenue collection system to better monitor payments of fines and other court fees and keep track of the progress of cases; the implementation of the system of E-Courts and E-Law whereby in the future, civil cases will be lodged electronically; the setting up of a user-friendly database to keep citizens abreast of new Acts of Parliament, or amendments to existing legislations; and a new mobile application enabling citizens to check cause lists, recent decisions of the Courts of Appeal and Supreme Court, and also access E-Court services such as online payment of fines.
ECONOMIC ENVIRONMENT
On the institutional front, methodical reforms undertaken to improve the Doing Business environment over the past decade has enabled the island economy to join the group of top 20 economies this year. Since 2005, the time needed to register property has decreased by more than 1 2 times and the time needed for business incorporation decreased by almost 10 times.
In parallel, Mauritius has distinguished itself as a leader and a high performer in promoting corporate governance on the African continent. The MO Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG) ranks Mauritius 1 st in Africa for the 1 2th consecutive year. This distinction clearly demonstrates the commitment of Mauritius in ensuring good governance practices, which is defined by the IIAG as the provision of the political, social and economic public goods and services that every citizen has the right to expect from their state, and that a state has the responsibility to deliver to its citizens.
A Public Sector Business Transformation Strategy is also in place since 201 7. The Strategy highlights the need for the public sector to continuously evolve, innovate and transform in order to respond to and anticipate the needs of each citizen as well as local and global clients. It also creates the momentum required to create a dynamic and innovative public sector, whereby quality service is delivered in an efficient, transparent, fair and equitable as well as an affordable manner.
BRIGHT SPOTS
1. Creating Awareness around Human Rights
Regular talks, seminars and awareness workshops on women's rights, children's rights, the rights of suspects at the Citizens' Advice Bureaux and Social Welfare Centres targeting NGOs, law enforcement officers, public officers and Civil Society at large are organised by the NHRC throughout the year. In 201 7, the EU financed a wide awareness project entitled Promotion of Respect of Human Rights in Mauritius and Rodrigues, run by the NHRC focusing on women, school children, private sector, police and prison officers.
The MJHRIR also carried out a national sensitisation campaign in 2018, launching a 'Know Your Rights' brochure and six short films related to Human Rights issues in 201 8.
In 2018, around 4,800 persons were sensitized by the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC), including those from vulnerable groups such as women, children, elderly persons, persons with disabilities as well as the media.
2. Enhancing Safety in the Country
In 201 7, the Safe City project was initiated to sustain a safe living and working environment. Some 4,000 Intelligent Video Surveillance (IVS) Cameras are being installed across the island. Amendments have also been brought to the Firearms Act to better monitor the movement of firearms within the country and in transit.
In addition to the setting up of the Independent Police Complains Commission (IPCC), cameras have also been installed in 78 police stations, including police cells to ensure the safety of our citizens.
Mercer's 21st annual Quality of Living survey positions Port Louis as the safest African city with the best quality of living on the continent.
3. Strenuous Fight against Corruption, Drug trafficking and Money laundering
Mauritius is also advocating a zero-tolerance policy towards corruption, drug trafficking, fraud and illicit money laundering practices.
The setting up of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) in 2002 and its consequent work in investigating into corruption and money laundering offences has contributed to the perception of Mauritius to be the least corrupt state in Africa. The country was ranked 56th out of 1 80 countries on the 2018 Corruption Perception Index.
In 201 5, a Good Governance and Integrity Reporting Act were enacted and an Integrity Reporting Services Agency (IRSA) was established to promote transparency, good governance and integrity in Mauritius as well as to investigate cases on unexplained wealth. In addition, to encourage a culture of integrity and to prevent corruption, a new Declaration of Assets Act for Members of Parliament and high ranking public offices was enacted in 2018.
To sustain a culture of intolerance to corruption, ICAC is working in close collaboration with Trade Unions, Civil Society and private partners. The Civil Society Network Against Corruption was reinforced with the setting up of Regional AntiCorruption Committees in each of the 9 districts and 1 in Rodrigues to empower at the grassroot level. With the private sector an Integrity Pledge Project was developed where collective action is taken in building strong alliance against corruption. This has prompted numerous changes in legislation, administrative procedures and increased use of technology for improved service delivery.

Box 8: Leadership in the Region
In 2018, Mauritius, in collaboration with the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC), organized the first Ministerial Conference on Maritime Security in the Western Indian Ocean Region, where a Mauritius Declaration and a Roadmap on Maritime Security was adopted.
Mauritius also currently chairs the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia (CGPCS). During the 21 st Plenary Session, Mauritius made proposals with regard to establishing the CGPCS as a permanent mechanism with a broader mandate to address other seaborne crimes and threats, such as terrorism threats and illegal, drug, human and arms trafficking, illegal trade and money laundering, Search and Rescue at sea, biodiversity and the impact of climate change.
Proposals are under study by members of the CGPCS and would be tabled at the 22 nd Plenary Session scheduled to be held back to back with the 2 nd Ministerial Conference on Maritime Security in June 2019.

4. Robust and Resilient Financial Institutions
Mauritius has 1 1 Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs) in force, including the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) with the United States, to address the problem of illicit financial flows and promote international cooperation in tax matters through exchange of information in line with Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) guidelines.
We are also committed to implementing the recommendations made by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in 1997. As a founding member of the Eastern and Southern Africa AntiMoney Laundering Group (ESAAMLG), a FATFstyle regional body for the Eastern and Southern African region, we aim at complying with the 40 Recommendations of the FATF. Following
the recent peer review exercise of the ESAAMLG, we amended the Financial Intelligence and Anti Money Laundering Act (FIAMLA) to allow for stricter control and adherence to international norms and standards.
Along the same lines, a re-rating of the 1 2 FAFT Recommendations were made and have been upgraded.
The legislative framework is being reinforced through the introduction of the Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism and Proliferation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Bill and the UN (Financial Prohibitions, Arms Embargo and Travel Ban) Sanctions Bill.


In 201 8, the regulatory institutions of the financial services sector - Financial Services Commission (FSC), the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU) and the Bank of Mauritius (BOM) - enhanced collaboration in the fight against money laundering and terrorist financing through a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU).
Procedures and sanctions are also in place to prevent criminals from holding shares or holding a management function in Mauritian institutions licensed under the Banking Act.
Reforms in the global business sector have been implemented so as to restrict the proliferation of shell companies. We are fully compliant with OECD standards. In addition, following the peer review by the OECD in 2018, the OECD indicated that we fulfil all requirements of the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) Action 5 and do not have any harmful practices in our tax regimes. This reaffirms our position as an International Financial Centre (IFC) of repute and substance.


CHALLENGES


Although Mauritius has strong laws for the protection of foreign workers, the lack of official data and referrals for criminal investigation and prosecution hinders the application of the law.
OPPORTUNITIES


Among five pioneer countries, Mauritius is establishing a National Recommendations Tracking Database in collaboration with the OHCHR. The system will facilitate the recording, tracking and reporting on the implementation of human rights recommendations and hence adherence to Human Rights.
Legislation in terms of Human Rights remain scattered in various pieces rendering its application more difficult.
Technology is bringing in a different kind of challenge in terms of fake news, fake profiles and abuse of social media.Capacity building is also important to address these challenges.A National Action Plan to combat Trafficking in Persons is currently under preparation.

The challenge remains on how to strengthen Mauritian institutions such that the perception of corruption and the situation in terms of drug trafficking is improved.
In 201 5, a Commission of Inquiry on Drug Trafficking was set up and the Commission submitted its report in June 2018 and thereafter rendered public. A Ministerial Committee was set up to look into the recommendations made by the Commission.
Mauritius is also working in close collaboration with the Global Call to Action on the World Drug Problem.
On the regional front, Mauritius is organising along with the IOC the Second Ministerial Conference on Maritime Security in June 2019 to discuss the progress and implementation of the Roadmap on Maritime Security.

CHALLENGES	
Combating money laundering and terrorism Mauritius has sought assistance from international financing. consultants to undertake an assessment of terrorism financing risks related to non-profit organisation (NPO) sector.
Assistance will also be required for legal and institutional reviews in view of strengthening further the effectiveness of institutions involved in the fight against corruption, money laundering and related crimes in Mauritius.
Capacity building is required in specialised and new fields like financial crimes and forensic investigations to deal effectively with emerging challenges.

The financial services sector remains exposed to growing international pressures, adverse press coverage and the changing international economic landscape.
Pursuing the progress achieved in simplifying processes in terms of Doing Business, adherence to the recommendations made by the ESAAMLG and OECD in terms of AML/CFT are seen as an opportune way to uphold the image of Mauritius as an IFC of international repute and substance.
With the assistance of the World Bank, the Bank of Mauritius is formulating a risk-based AML/CFT framework that will further improve the regulatory framework of the Mauritius IFC.
Additional reforms are underway to ensure an orderly transition of the Global Business segment to an industry of higher value added while mitigating financial risks.
The Mauritius Financial Services Commission (FSC) has ceased the issue of Category 2 Global Business Companies (GBCs) as from January 201 9, with a grandfathering provision.
A Blueprint has also been elaborated to innovate and transform the Mauritius IFC of 2030.





Togetherness brings Strength - our Diverse Nation

Over the years Mauritius has nurtured a strong relationship with its development partners. Africa, China, India, European countries, United States among others have lent support to our development efforts and aspirations from early days. The various trade and commercial agreements, the Lomé Convention, the Cotonou Agreements, the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), and the Double Taxation Agreement with India have been important instruments for economic growth.
To sustain this growth and for the successful implementation of SDGs, we have to reply on partnerships as Government can not do it alone.
At the local level, we have a whole-of-society approach in our policy discussions and we hold consultations with a broad spectrum of partners. During our annual Budget exercise, we consult with key stakeholders, including the private sector, trade unions, Civil Society, the youth and the public at large.
On the regional front, we are an active member of various regional blocs, including the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA), the Southern African Development Community (SADC), the Indian Ocean Commission (IOC) and the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA).
The African Union continues to guide many of our actions through important initiatives such as Agenda 2063, the African Continental Free Trade Area (ACFTA), the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), amongst others.
TRADE RELATIONS
Our main instruments of trade have been the Lomé Conventions, the Cotonou Agreement and since 2009, the Interim Economic Partnership Agreement (iEPA), whereby Eastern and Southern African States (ESA), which include Madagascar, Mauritius, Seychelles and Zimbabwe, have dutyfree and quota-free access to the EU market. As part of the ESA states, we are currently involved in discussions with the EU to deepen and widen the iEPA and further trade relations with the El-J. In addition, in view of ensuring predictability and continuity of our trade relations with the UK, we negotiated and signed in January 2019 a ESA-UK Economic Partnership Agreement.
In 201 8, around 45 percent of our total exports were towards European countries. Though the EU remains our main export market, a decreasing trend in exports to the EU is noted since 2014. During the period 201 4 to 2018, exports to the EU fell by 21 percent, indicating some further diversification of the export market. The European Union thus remains a key development partner for Mauritius. We engage yearly with the EU on a Political Dialogue.
Under the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA), we have preferential access to the US market. Exports to the US doubled over the last ten years moving from Rs 3.9 billion (approximately USD 1 08 million) in 2008 to reach Rs 8.0 billion (approximately USD 225 million) in 201 8. The share of our total exports to the United States increased from 7 percent in 2008 to reach 1 2 percent in 201 8. The United States remains an important development partner.
Over the last decade, the share of total exports to the African continent increased from 1 7 percent in 2008 to 27 percent in 2018. As a member of the COMESA and SADC, Mauritius has duty-free market access for goods exported to the region. We are also party to the Tripartite Free Trade Agreement (T FTA) and the African Continental Free Trade Agreement (AfCFTA), which provide greater access to the African market for goods and services.
Since preferential market access is being eroded with globalisation and as part of the strategy to further diversify markets, we have embarked on trade negotiations with China and India. Comprehensive trade agreements covering both goods and services are being finalised with respective countries
STRENGTHENING REGIONAL COOPERATION - AFRICA STRATEGY
In view of furthering regional cooperation, Mauritius adopted an Africa Strategy. The Accelerated Program for Economic Integration (APEI), an initiative supported by the World Bank is testimony of the successful partnership established between Mauritius, Seychelles, Malawi, Zambia and Mozambique to speed up economic integration and eliminate trade barriers. One of the key initiatives of the APEI is the free movement of business people between them.
Mauritius has also established an extensive network of bilateral Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements (DTAAs) and Investment Protection and Promotion Agreements (IPPAs) to encourage trade and investment flows. Furthermore, with a view to enhancing connectivity, we established Bilateral Air Services Agreements (BASAs) and MOUs with various African countries, namely: Botswana, Egypt, Eswatili, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Port-Louis is also connected via shipping lines to regional ports such as Cape Town, Dar es Salaam, Durban and Mombasa.
We have set up a Mauritius Africa Fund (MAF), with a seed capital of Rs 500 million (approximately USD 14 million), to encourage domestic enterprises to invest in Africa. MOUs have been signed to develop Special Economic Zones in Senegal, Ghana, Cote D'Ivoire and Madagascar.
In terms of enhancing capabilities of policymakers in the region, Mauritius has joined hands with the IMF to set up two regional capacity building institutions - the AFRITAC South and the Africa Training Institute (ATI).
MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
Finance
We have a Three-year Strategic Plan which sets out the strategic framework for each Ministry and key economic and social sectors. It is updated annually during the Budget exercise in line with resources available from both domestic and foreign sources to enable implementation of projects earmarked for the period.
However, since Mauritius progressed to the upper Middle-Income Country status, we find it increasingly difficult to tap financial assistance from external sources, especially in terms of grants and concessional loans from development partners.
Mauritius has thus embarked on finding innovative and alternative means of financing from its traditional development partners and new ones.

Figure 12: Government Revenue
	Total revenue	proportion of taxes over total reven ue
	24	95.0

2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Source: Statistics Mauritius

Domestic Resources
Prudent fiscal discipline and management has enabled the country to finance national priorities through taxation. As an example, over the past three years, around 90 percent of total Government revenue was derived from taxation.
The Fiscal Strategy for the medium term is geared towards maintaining macroeconomic stability to support inclusive growth, employment creation and uplifting the quality of life of the population. As regards to tax revenue, the strategy is underpinned by measures to improve buoyancy of the tax system while combating non-declaration and under-declaration of tax liabilities. On the expenditure side, our strategy rests on the premise of doing more with less, that is, to contain recurrent expenditure, reduce wastage and improve service delivery.
In addition, we developed a medium term Debt Management Strategy with the objective of: (1) ensuring that our borrowing needs and payment obligations are met at the lowest possible cost while maintaining risks at a prudent level; and (2) supporting the development of the market for Government securities in view of reducing the cost of debt servicing in the long run.
Official Development Assistance (ODAs)
Annual Net ODAs received by Mauritius over the period 201 2-2016 was estimated at an average of Rs 2 billion (approximately USD 56 million), that is around 0.5 percent of GDP. However, with recent investments made in public infrastructure and assistance from trading partners, Net ODAs received in 201 7/2018 was estimated at around Rs 8.9 billion (approximately USD 250 million), representing around 2 percent of GDP.
Grants received from foreign governments are estimated at 6.9 percent of total revenue for the 2018/2019. These include a substantial grant of Rs 4.8 billion (approximately USD 1 34 million) from the Government of India for the construction of the Metro Express System. Moreover, the IMF and the World Bank are providing technical assistance to strengthen the domestic financial system, assist in debt reduction and capacity building in the public sector.

Figure 13: Net ODAs Received
10

	2016/17 Actual	2017/18 (Estimates)	2018/19 (Estimates)
Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Development

Foreign Direct Investment
Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is a major means for the implementation of the SDGs. The Bank of Mauritius (BOM) reported total FDI amounting to Rs 1 7.5 billion (approximately USD 492 million) in 2017 which represents an increase of around 25 percent compared to 201 0. These inflows were mostly from France and other EU Countries, China and South Africa, which invested largely in the financial services sector and real estate activities. Gross official international reserves were estimated at Rs 217.6 billion (approximately USD 6 billion) in 2018, representing 1 1 months of imports.
Remittances
At 1.1 percent of GDP, remittances remain fairly low. Inward remittances for the 201 7/18 were estimated at Rs 2.1 billion (approximately USD 59 million), which were received mostly from Europe. The top two source countries were France (27.5 percent of total) and United Kingdom (15.6 percent of total)
With around 40,000 foreign workers in the country, outward remittances totaled Rs 5.3 billion (approximately USD 140 million) in 201 7/18, of which 73 percent were directed to Asian countries, in particular, to Bangladesh (35 percent) and India (29.5 percent). The remitters were largely employed in the manufacturing and construction sectors (60 percent).
National Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Foundation
We introduced in the Income Tax Act in 2009, the CSR system requiring profitable companies to devote 2 percent of their book profits to carry out CSR activities under approved programmes as per published guidelines. These activities can be carried out either directly by the companies or through an approved NGO, a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), such as a Foundation, or by a Corporate partner.
Initially, priority areas identified for CSR programmes included health initiatives, leisure and sports projects, environment, education and training and natural catastrophes. Subsequently, the CSR guidelines provided for half of the CSR resources to be directed towards social housing, welfare of children from vulnerable groups and eradication of absolute poverty. We now have a National CSR Foundation with overall responsibility for allocating the CSR Funds. Since the setting up of the Foundation, we have mobilized some Rs 1 billion (approximately USD 30 million), out of which around Rs 500 million (approximately USD 14 million) have already been committed to support some 500 projects from NGOs in the ten priority areas including educational support and training, social and family protection, disability and health care.
Alternative Modes of Financing
In recent years, we laid emphasis on developing the Green Economy with new high-value added jobs, while addressing environmental issues and challenges. To support this initiative, we are exploring innovative development financing mechanisms, such as green bonds to finance projects with environmental or climate change benefits.
In 2018, the Stock Exchange of Mauritius (SEM) launched the Mauritius Green Bonds Market Development Initiative, with the support of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development and the United Nations Partnership for Action on Green Economy (UN PAGE) to develop a greenbond ecosystem in the country. Through this Green Bond market, SEM is seeking to gradually open up an avenue to mobilize investments into green and sustainable development projects that address climate change. This will enable the public and private sector to issue and list Green Bonds on SEM to raise capital for their "green" projects.
MONITORING AND EVALUATION
Given financial constraints and the concern over rising public debt, we recently introduced a number of monitoring and evaluation tools. Since 2015, we significantly improved the annual budgeting process through the adoption of a performance-based approach. This measure focuses on key actions and targets while ensuring that line Ministries and Departments are judiciously spending their annual allocations to meet intended objectives.
Moreover, we require Ministries and Departments to submit a Progress Report on Achievements and Performance for each financial year to the Accountant General as part of the Annual Financial Statements of the Government, which is a requirement under the Finance and Audit Act.
The Three-year Strategic Plan is a rolling plan which is updated during Budget preparation. We released a revised version in 201 8/19 and tabled same in the National Assembly together with the Budget Estimates. These documents give an overview of the current situation in the different sectors, indicate the medium and long term goals of each sector, the respective enablers and the key actions and performance targets by sector for the next three years.
To better monitor the implementation of Budget measures, we recently set up three Project Monitoring and Coordination Committees (PMCC) namely:
• PMCC for Community Based Projects chaired by the Vice Prime Minister, Minister of Local Government and Outer Islands, to monitor implementation of infrastructural projects at community level, which includes amenities, roads and drain projects;
• PMCC for Other Capita/ Projects chaired by the Minister of Agro-Industry and Food Security, which monitors capital projects implemented by line Ministries; and
• PMCC for Non-Infrastructure Measures chaired by the Financial Secretary, which monitors remaining budget measures, namely legislations, programmes, schemes and capital projects.

NEXT STEPS AND WAY FORWARD



This VNR Report has allowed us to evaluate the progress we have made in terms of building an inclusive and sustainable nation for all Mauritians and what more needs to be done. We have adopted a people-centred approach to policy-making and national development since independence and intend to continue to accelerate our efforts to achieve our goal of highincome status while leaving no one behind, in the spirit of unity in diversity, /amé dan /amé (Hand in Hand).
The Report has also provided us the opportunity to consolidate our relationship with all segments of society. We need to sustain the momentum created and ensure that we engage in a more holistic manner with all our stakeholders, including the private sector, Civil Society, NGOs, academia, beneficiaries of programmes.
While our national policies are aligned to the SDGs, we still face difficulties in ensuring coherent action and coordinate with our stakeholders on a large scale. This is amplified when we have to report regularly to different international frameworks, including the SDGs, the SAMOA Pathway, AU Agenda 2063 and the APRM. Moreover, due to limited capacity locally, all these processes are at risk of remaining shallow and not bringing the required change that we would like to see for future generations.
On the institutional front, we currently working towards the establishment of a permanent structure that will allow continued monitoring of progress made in the implementation of the SDGs. We would also advocate for the international community to design a common monitoring and reporting mechanism, via a common platform, for the various initiatives, thus reducing the burden and possible duplication off the limited human and financial resources of small countries such as Mauritius.
The VNR process also highlighted the importance of sustaining a coordinated and inclusive approach in the implementation of national policies, including the SDGs. Though our economy has shown resilience to external shocks and we have successfully addressed structural bottlenecks time and again, it is today increasingly important for us to manage our public sector debt.
Thus, in the face of external uncertainties, Brexit, fluctuating oil prices and unexpected unintended events, it is extremely important for us to adopt prudent fiscal policies to retain the stability of our economy. Moreover, as an upper middle income country which does not have easy access to concessional loans or grants and thus has to rely on domestic funds for its development, fund management is of high importance.
In addition, while enhancing our external competitiveness through structural reforms aimed at improving our business environment and boosting productivity as well as enhancing the efficiency of our labour market, we have to ensure that our development model remains anchored in shared prosperity and enhanced quality of life.
In parallel, we continue to grapple with a rapidly aging population, skills mismatch in our labour market, youth unemployment and lower female participation in economic activities.


— 115 As a SIDS, we remain highly vulnerable to climate change, including flash floods and sea level rise.
We have embarked on a number of initiatives in terms of improving our competitiveness and connectivity. Connectivity is of the highest importance given our geographical location and distance from our main markets. Leveraging on our traditional and new partnerships, innovation and technology, we aspire to develop new economic pillars and build blue and green legacies for our next generation.
Finally, while we believe that there is no one-sizefits-all formula to the development path of any country. Mauritius has had a unique journey as a multi-cultural, multi-religious and multi-ethnic nation. We remain confident that we can walk the talk.

