1.0  Highlights 
 
Saint Lucia’s first Voluntary National Review (VNR) Report was conducted at an appropriate stage in our national development planning and review process; it coincided with the formulation of Saint Lucia’s Medium-Term Development Strategy (MTDS) for the period 2019- 2022.  The MTDS with six key result areas at its core, will guide the implementation of a strategic vision with a goal of delivering a more sustainable and inclusive Saint Lucia by 2022. 
 
In early 2017 Saint Lucia’s Cabinet of Minister endorsed the establishment of the national coordination mechanism for the 2030 Agenda. It comprises a SDGCabinet Sub Committee of Ministers (CSC) and a Sustainable Development Goals National Coordinating Committee (SDGNCC) which is the governing committee tasked to guide the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs.  
 
Following the establishment of the coordination mechanism, the Government of Saint Lucia (GOSL) through the SDGNCC and in collaboration with the United Nations Development System (UNDS), conducted a Rapid Integrated Assessment (RIA) in May 2018. The RIA undertook a review of Saint Lucia’s 32 planning documents which loosely made up a national planning framework, to assess the coverage and alignment of the SDGs and their targets. In addition, GOSL’s Office of Audit conducted a performance audit of Saint Lucia’s readiness to implement the SDGs. These initial processes laid the groundwork for further assistance from the UNDS. In May 2019 the Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy support (MAPS) Mission was launched in Saint Lucia, with a goal of assisting the GOSL with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and to achieve the SDGs.  
 
In April 2018, the Government of Saint Lucia embarked on an inclusive and strategic process to develop the country’s Medium-Term Development Strategy (MTDS) 2019-2022. A pivotal part of the process was the identification of the six key result areas (KRAs) of Healthcare, Education, Citizen Security, Agriculture, Infrastructure and Tourism; and the iterative process of issue prioritisation and the development of solutions based and actionable implementation programmes within these areas. The process also aligned the KRAs to their respective SDG and the focus on these goals and areas in the medium is expected to produce a catalytic effect on development across the social, environmental and economic landscape in the long term. 
 
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) provided an important motivational force to the GOSL for the development of initiatives, programmes and policies to tackle extreme poverty and advance development. Building on some of the successes during the MDG period Saint Lucia, in advance of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, has made meaningful strides with initiatives and programmes that now contribute toward the successful attainment of SDG targets – but progress in mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda has been challenging. Therefore, recognizing that three years post adoption of the 2030 Agenda, national progress was not moving at an adequate pace, the decision was made to conduct a national review to capitalize on the VNR process to accelerate national momentum and raise awareness.  
Saint Lucia like other small island developing states, continue to struggle under the weight of our unique challenges. We have made the commitment to implementing the 2030 Agenda within a national context of our vulnerable environmental sustainability - in the face of our acute vulnerability to natural hazards, and the substantial risks as a result of climate change and rising sea levels. Added to this scenario is a shortage of investible resources, the loss of correspondent banking relationships, limited fiscal capacity and flexibility to meet investment requirements, decreasing access to foreign direct investment and ODA and high ratios of government debt to GDP.  Debt service absorbs significant proportions of fiscal revenues compounding our difficulties of financing long-term development and the delivery of critical social services such as public health and security.   
 
Saint Lucia is challenged to meet expanded investment requirements for economic transformation, climate change adaptation and mitigation and the expansion of economic and social infrastructure, among others. Therefore, in order for us to adequately implement our national development goals, and advance our sustainable development, we rely on the global partnership for development being balanced against our own domestic resource mobilization, as a critical supportive driver of our success. 
 
The UNDS remains a strong partner to Saint Lucia along with other international development partners, who provide support to our efforts to successfully implement the 2030 Agenda. It is through such collaboration that we expect to operationalise our MTDS, while simultaneously mobilising the appropriate resources to building and strengthening our systems and mechanisms, and developing our long term national development plans. 
 
Saint Lucia’s VNR will focus on nine specific SDGs – those under review at the 2019 HLPF in addition to those goals that align to our Medium Term Development Strategy.  
 
 
 
 
 

2.0  Review Methodology  
 
 
    The Sustainable Development Goals National Coordinating Committee (SDGNCC) managed the process of the preparation of Saint Lucia’s VNR, through a consultant who administered the process in three phases. The first comprised an extensive desk review; the second phase benefited from stakeholder engagement; and the third was the drafting of the report. 
 
Process for preparation of Saint Lucia’s Voluntary National Review Report Phase 1  
 
Document Review Reports reviewed: 
 
• The UNDS RIA and MAPS scoping Mission Reports 
• Sectoral Policies, Plans and Strategies and Implementation reports 
• Annual Statistical reviews 
• The reports of national consultations, public sensitization and education activities on the SDGs and the prioritization of the SDGs by major stakeholder groups, and in the national development framework. 
• Statistical and Administrative Data 
• Data from international monitoring 
• Status of implementation of Multilateral Environmental Agreements and other priority thematic areas such as energy, education, agriculture, water and sanitation, health and wellness, etc. 
• Other documents presented in Annex 1 Phase 2  
 
Stakeholder Engagement 
 
To validate the findings form the document review and to obtain buy-in from the 
various stakeholders Meetings and focus group discussions were conducted with: 
 
• Members of the SDGNCC  
• Members of Cabinet SDG Sub- committee 
• Relevant officials in agencies that are critical to delivering on goal targets and indicators of the SDGs under review 
• Foreign  Mission representatives stationed in Saint Lucia who provided support to specific agencies toward SDG implementation 
• Focus group discussions with a representative sample of civil society groups and the private sector, Faith based Organisations, persons with disabilities, Women’s Organisations and other such relevant organisations 
• National consultation, coordinated by the SDGNCC Phase 3 
 
Preparation of VNR Report 
  
• Zero Draft and Main messages 
• Report summarizing discussions and conclusions from main stakeholder consultations 
• Validation of Final draft by the SDGNCC 
 
 
Fig 1: Goals reviewed in Saint Lucia’s VNR report 
 
 
 
The goals selected for review were endorsed at a national stakeholder consultation and they represent those goals under review at the HLPF 2019, and those that align with Saint Lucia’s Medium Term Development Strategy.  They also include some of the priority goals identified by Civil Society and the Private Sector in Saint Lucia. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.0  Policy and Enabling Environment 
 
 
 
3.1 	National Ownership of the SDGs 
 
 
Public Sector 
 
In October 2015 following the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the 
Government of Saint Lucia convened a subcommittee of Permanent Secretaries, to review the sustainable development goals and targets with a view to establishing a preliminary alignment of the goals to each government Ministry. Following the review, it was determined that there was a need to:  
 
Establish a framework for monitoring and evaluation for the SDG; and  
Develop a coordinating mechanism amongst ministries for reporting on SDGs.  
 
In keeping with the early assessments the GOSL in early 2017 established its National Coordination Mechanism for the 2030 Agenda. It comprises a SDG-Cabinet Sub-Committee of Ministers (CSC) who provide policy guidance to the Sustainable Development Goals National Coordinating Committee (SDGNCC) - the governing committee tasked to guide the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Saint Lucia. 
 
Following its establishment the SDGNCC immediately embarked on sensitisation activities to raise awareness of the 2030 Agenda across public sector institutions. A number of sessions have been held with public sector agencies with a focus on aligning the SDGs with work programmes, budget planning and reporting processes. 
 
Civil Society 
 
In November 2016, Civil Society Organisations lead by the Saint Lucia National Trust (SLNT) convened a consultation, under the theme, “National Views on the Sustainable Development Goals and the Small Islands Developing States (SIDS) Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway”. The consultation provided the opportunity for CSO participants to discuss among themselves and analyse the goals and targets to assess their applicability to their respective organisations and mandates. The outcome of the consultations was a priority ranking of the SDGs in order of importance to and impact on the work of CSO. 
 
 

 
Fig 2: Key Messages from the CSO Consultation 
 
 
 The top three goals identified are as follows:  
 
i. 	Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture  ii. 	Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and quality education for all and promote lifelong learning  
iii. 	Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. 
 
 
Further to the November 2016 consultation the CSO network have also concluded an assessment to identify capacity limitations for mainstreaming the SDGs into their individual and collective mandates.  As a result of the assessment, the CSO network has undertaken training sessions to enhance capacity constraints. 
 
Private Sector 
 
A Private Sector Seminar was held in June 2018 to raise awareness of the SDGs and examine how the private sector in Saint Lucia can contribute to the achievement of the SDGs and in turn how the SDGs can help private sector entities meet their organisational goals. Like the civil society groups, the private sector participants identified a priority list of SDGs as follows: 
 
i. 	Goal 2 – Zero Hunger ii. 	Goal 3 – Good Health iii. Goal 4 – Quality Education iv. Goal 6 – Clean Water and Sanitation 
	v. 	Goal 8 – Decent Work and Economic Growth 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2   Incorporation of Sustainable Development Goals into national frameworks 
 
 
United Nations Development System Support 
 
In May 2018 the United Nations Development System (UNDS), conducted a Rapid Integrated Assessment (RIA). The RIA undertook a review of Saint Lucia’s 32 planning documents which loosely made up a national planning framework, to assess the coverage and alignment of the SDGs and their targets. In addition, Saint Lucia’s Office of Audit conducted a performance audit of Saint Lucia’s readiness to implement the SDGs. These initial processes laid the groundwork for further assistance from the UNDS. In May 2019 the Mainstreaming, Acceleration and Policy support (MAPS) Mission was launched in Saint Lucia, with a goal of assisting the GOSL with the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and to achieve the SDGs.  
 
Vulnerability Resilience Country Profile 
 
Saint Lucia’s national development planning history has been largely focused on medium term planning with 3-5 year plans, driven by political administrations. However between November 2016 and March 2017, the Ministry with responsibility for Economic Development undertook to develop a Vulnerability Resilience Country Profile (VRCP), via the toolkit which was developed by UN-DESA.  
 
The VRCP process consisted of a self-assessment of Saint Lucia’s progress in mitigating against vulnerability and building resilience to internal and external threats. The VRCP enabled the prioritisation of the SAMOA Pathway and corresponding SDGs through a multi-sectoral approach and through broad based participation of stakeholders. The VRCP in Saint Lucia is guided by seven pillars for national development identified by the Department of Economic Development and validated through a national inter-sectoral and inter-agency consultation. The seven pillars and their corresponding SDGs are presented in Fig 
 
Samoa Pathway and the SDGs 
 
The SAMOA Pathway and the Sustainable Development Goals are intrinsically linked, albeit autonomous frameworks, that have to be integrated into Saint Lucia’s national development planning to achieve sustainable development. The integration of relevant global frameworks such as the SDGs and the SAMOA Pathway into national development policy and planning does not require wholesale adoption but, rather, prioritisation and domestication in accordance with national priorities and needs. To this end, Saint Lucia has undertaken a mapping of the SAMOA Pathway and the SDGs against the pillars that it has identified for incorporation into its national development framework. 
 
While Saint Lucia has strong policy frameworks and instruments in critical areas of sustainable development, there is a need for a comprehensive, medium to long-term development planning framework that can guide policy, programming, investments and partnerships, and within which the relevant goals, targets and provisions of the SDGs and SAMOA Pathway could be integrated. In response to this need, Saint Lucia is in the process of preparing a medium-term development strategy for 2019 to 2022 and has begun the process to develop a national development plan for a twenty-year period. 
 
 
The Medium Term Development Plan 
 
In April 2018, the Government of Saint Lucia embarked on an inclusive and strategic process to develop the country’s Medium-Term Development Strategy (MTDS) 2019-2022. The Prime Minister and his Cabinet produced outputs which formed the basis of the work programme of consultative economic and social Labs. The Labs, which functioned as idea incubators, facilitated interactive discussions between participants from 134 organizations representing the full spectrum of relevant stakeholders, from the public and private sectors, and civil society, and was conducted over the course of a month. They engaged in an iterative process of issue prioritization and the development of solutions based and actionable implementation programmes, with associated goals and targets around six Key Results Areas (KRAs). 
 
 
 
Fig 3: Alignment of the MTDS Six Key Result areas with the SDGs 
 
 
The KRAs are to be integrated into the MTDS as national priorities and include three Economic areas - tourism, agriculture and infrastructure, and three Social - healthcare, education and citizen security. Saint Lucia’s overarching environmental priority remains addressing the adverse effects of climate change, which impacts and cross cuts every area and sector that contributes to our sustainable development.   The next step in the process involves the development of detailed implementation programmes and projects (termed “game changers”), with associated key performance indicators, budgets, governance structures and a delivery mechanism anchored in the establishment of a Performance Management and Delivery Unit (PMDU). 
 
Provisions have been made in Saint Lucia’s national 2019/2020 budget cycle to support aspects of the MTDS. In addition, the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) will also look to align with the MTDS outputs in developing the Saint Lucia Country Strategy Paper for 2019-2022. The KRAs that underpin the MTDS have been aligned to 4 SDGs, however the impact of the successful implementation of the MTDS will contribute to progress across the SDG range.  
 
 
The National Development Plan 
 
Saint Lucia is also in the process of formulating a longer term National Development Plan (NDP). The lead in phase of the plan’s development is guided by the outputs of the VRCP, and will be underpinned by the following seven broad pillars: 
 
1. Building Productive Capacity & Expanding Growth Opportunities 
2. Building Strong Institutions 
3. Infrastructure, Connectivity & Energy 
4. Adaptation for Environmental Sustainability and Climate Change 
5. Social Transformation, Building Social Resilience and Social Capital 
6. Enhancing the Labour Force 
7. Promoting Physical Health and Wellness 
 
A preliminary alignment of the SDGs with the seven pillars that would form the basis of the NDP is outlined below: 
 

 	NDP Pillar 	Corresponding SDG Goal 
1 Building 	Productive 	Capacity 	and 	Expanding 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth 
Growth 	9: Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure 
Opportunities - focuses on the real economic growth sectors and effective export development including manufacturing, tourism, culture and heritage, non- financial services. 2 Building Strong Institutions that are a Platform for 16: Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions Growth and Development - focuses on the institutional and regulatory environment in which growth and development takes place 
3 Infrastructure, Connectivity and Energy – Key for Growth and Competitiveness - focuses on enhancing the efficiency of production, transportation, and communication environment in which growth and development takes place since the accessibility and quality of infrastructure help investment decisions. This needs to be complemented with access to efficient and affordable energy 7: Affordable and Clean Energy 
9: Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure 
12: Responsible Consumption 
4 Adaptation 	for 	Environmental 	Sustainability, 1: End Poverty 
	Climate 	Change 	and 	Disaster 	Vulnerability 2: Zero Hunger 
Reduction – focuses on pathways towards the 12: Responsible Consumption development of Green and Blue Economy, and a 13: Climate Action focus on economic and social vulnerability 14: Life Below Water management attached with environmental risks, 15: Life on Land disaster and climate change risk management. 
5 Social Transformation, Building Social Resilience and Social Capital - building social resilience and social capital, including integrated approaches to poverty reduction, re-discovering and re-defining the Saint Lucian identity, building community and social capital. 1: End Poverty 
4: Quality Education 
5: Gender Equality 
2: Zero Hunger 6 Enhancing the Labour Force through Education, 4: Quality Education 
Training and Workforce Development - examines the 8: Decent Work and Economic Growth 
	quality 	relevance 	of 	education, 	education 10: Reduced Inequalities 
infrastructure, inequality, and gender inequality and competence among youth and development of a technically qualified trained workforce to meet national, regional and international needs of the industry, businesses and institutions. 
7 Improving Health and Wellness - focuses on 2: Zero Hunger 
strengthening health systems to address both 3: Good Health and Well Being for All People communicable and non-communicable diseases. It also encompasses the promotion of wellness and preventative care.  
 
 
	3.3 	Institutional mechanisms 
 
 
National Coordinating Mechanism 
 
Recognising the need for an integrated and structured approach to the implementation of the 2030 Development Agenda, the Prime Minister and his Cabinet established the National Coordinating Mechanism for implementing the 2030 Agenda and the 17 SDGs. The Mechanism comprises comprises a SDG-Cabinet Sub-Committee of Ministers (CSC) who provide policy guidance to the Sustainable Development Goals National Coordinating Committee (SDGNCC) - the governing committee tasked to guide the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Saint Lucia.  
 
The SDG-Cabinet Sub-Committee is chaired by the Minister for Sustainable Development, and is further constituted by the Minister for External Affairs, the Minister for Equity, Social Justice and Empowerment, the Minister of Finance and the Minister for Economic Development. 
 
The SDGNCC is a multi-sectoral committee co-chaired by the Ministries responsible for Sustainable 
Development and Economic Development and is mandated to convene once every quarter. The interMinisterial SDGNCC is also comprised of representatives and alternates from the private sector, Academia, Youth, Civil Society and Non-Government Organizations. The Committee’s mandate provides for mandatory engagement with Faith-Based and Community-based organizations, as well as Persons with Disabilities, women’s groups and the wider public to ensure that no one is left behind.  
 
 
Fig 4: National Coordination Mechanism for the Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals 
 
 
The SDGNCC is mandated to, inter alia: 
 
i. Spearhead the development of the SDGs Roadmap for Saint Lucia and to mobilise resources for its implementation;  
ii. Provide guidance and develop mechanisms to align the SDG implementation process with other national processes;  
iii. Report on progress to the Cabinet of Ministers;  
iv. manage and implement an advocacy plan and communication strategy for the 2030 Agenda v. 	Monitor and report on the progress of the implementation of the SDGs 
 
 
Recommendations emanating from the National Audit Report have provided guidance for the enhancement of the responsibilities of the SDGNCC, which they are incorporating into their remit as follows:  
 
i. The identification of potential resources and capacity gaps that may affect the implementation of the 2030 agenda through collaboration with the Ministry of Finance and any other relevant ministry or agency that may be able to assess these resources and capacities;  
ii. Comprehensive review of its implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the national, regional and international level, and commit to making these reviews happen. iii. The establishment of baselines, national targets, means of measurement for targets or periods for review and reporting on the implementation of the 2030 agenda; and 
iv. Assessment of the country’s data collection framework. 
 
 
 
 
 
National Statistical System 
 
In 2015, the UNDS provided assistance to the Government of Saint Lucia for the preparation of a baseline study that reviewed and evaluated the status of data and statistics in Saint Lucia. The study identified the existing capacity limitations in statistics; the institutional arrangements for collecting and disseminating statistical data; and the programmes and initiatives of relevance to statistical development, including development of indicators for SDGs. 
 
The study categorised Saint Lucia as “data poor”. It found the National Statistical System (NSS)1 to be uncoordinated and characterized by untimely and non-user-friendly data from the satellite units in the line Ministries. These Ministries are often equipped with inadequate statistical and IT capacity. Additionally, the scope of the various administrative units that generate information is mostly limited to the programme or institutional mandate of which they are part of. These satellite units are not linked by a legal, programmatic or functional system that organizes and supplements them to ensure that they act as a component of a single statistical system. 
 
The NSS is further characterized by under-funding. There is a reliance on donor support, particularly for household surveys. Overall, there is a shortfall in funding for the core statistical systems required to provide information for sustainable development. There needs to be a widening of the scope and coverage of statistical data collection for Saint Lucia to embark on a programme of monitoring and evaluating its 2030 agenda.  
 
 
3.4 	Leaving no one behind 
 
The Government of Saint Lucia recognizes that poverty is a multi- dimensional concept comprising social, economic and environmental deprivation. Increasing environmental scarcities, risks and vulnerabilities, growing economic uncertainty and inequalities, and the continued existence of high rates of unemployment, are important factors for understanding and addressing poverty in Saint Lucia. Those who are in need of equitable and integrated Social Protection services include those who are already marginalized through poverty, indigence and lack of access to natural and financial capital, as well as those who are economically and socially vulnerable to marginalization. 
 
In 2014 the Government of Saint Lucia approved the country’s first National Social Protection Policy to guide the development of a framework, which promotes equity and enhances the well-being and capacity of poor and vulnerable households and populations in Saint Lucia to protect their consumption; invest in their future; and contribute meaningfully to national sustainable development. The Policy also aims to guide the construction of a system that enhances efficiency, equity and transparency in delivering social protection services, while avoiding duplication and promoting synergies to reduce poverty and protect the most vulnerable population. It proposes a reform process and an effort to rationalize the existing interventions by merging, expanding or reducing them, based on their objectives vis-à-vis the actual needs of the population and the capacities of the implementing agencies and institutions.  
 
The policy combines a mixture of protective, preventive and transformative measures oriented at: 
i. Alleviating economic, social and environmental deprivation, including relief of chronic and extreme poverty (protective); 
ii. Reducing the consequences and impact of shocks before they occur (preventive); iii. Enhancing human capital, real income, capabilities and assets, while avoiding damage iv. to the existing natural capital in order to facilitate the transition towards a Green Economy; and v. 	Addressing social equity and exclusion concerns, including discrimination and abuse 
 
The country has recommitted to poverty reduction within the framework set by the SDGs. Over the last two decades, it has reorganised its institutional structures specifically designed to treat with poverty. There has been effort at coherence in the machinery of the state in the development and application of pro-poor measures and collaboration among institutions has improved efficiency and equity in the structure of social transfers to the poor and the vulnerable. In spite of slow growth or even the decline in the economy, there was a reduction in poverty and indigence over the ten-year period between 2006 and 20162 , likely due in part to the better performance of the institutions engaged in poverty monitoring and alleviation. 
 
The Public Assistance Programme (PAP) was initiated by the 1968 Public Assistance Act. According to the Act, the PAP is expected to provide direct financial support to needy persons. On a monthly basis, a representative from the household receives a cash allowance for himself or herself or on behalf of one or more members of the household. The eligibility criterion for PAP is based on a locally developed proxy means test, the SL-NET. Short of having specific and dependable data on the income levels within households, the proxy means test is an approach for deriving a proxy (an estimate or substitute) of the household’s means (or ‘income’) based on other known details about the household.  SL-NET now serves as a targeting instrument for the programme, since it produces for each household a poverty score, which is then used by officers to 
 
The PAP also includes a disability grant.  The Disability Grant represents a separate window of support specifically for children with disabilities. A monthly grant of $200 per child is provided to eligible households to provide support in caring for children with severe disabilities. Eligibility is determined through specified medical screening at public health facilities. 
 
The National Insurance Scheme (NIS), established by the National Insurance Act of 1978, provides retirement, disability, maternity, workers’ injury, and survivors benefits. The National Insurance is funded by a mandatory 10% payroll tax (5% employer contribution and 5% employee contribution) levied on wages of all employed and self-employed persons, including public sector employees. Only a small percentage of self-employed, seasonal, domestic, or informal sector workers contribute.  
 
The Ministry of Health and Wellness implements a universal non-contributory pharmaceutical programme by providing free pharmaceuticals to all diabetics and all diabetics with hypertension, irrespective of income.  
 
The St. Lucia Social Development Fund (SSDF) was established in 2009 through the Poverty Reduction Fund (Amendment) Act of 2009 to bring Saint Lucia’s two demand driven community-based initiatives, the Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF) and the Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) under one administrative framework. SSDF implements community infrastructure and development projects as well as programmes targeted to individual households. The SSDF also implements, through the BNTF, a demand driven programme that provides funding for access roads, health and education facilities, community markets, and water supplies in poor communities.  In addition, the SSDF has a number of socio-economic programs providing public assistance, skills training, capacity building and institutional strengthening. Such programmes are delivered to vulnerable and/or at-risk households and communities through strategic and valued partnerships with various social agencies. 
 
The Education Assistance Programme delivers educational services and support to poor families and the economically disadvantaged. It is designed to enable these households to focus their limited resources on developing strategic and sustainable livelihoods. 
 
The Book Bursary Programme administered by the Ministry of Education was established to assist parents and guardians of children who are unemployed, needy or otherwise challenged.  It provides textbooks related to all the core subjects that are being taught at the primary school.  The Ministry also runs a School Feeding Programme which is a social assistance programme that is provided at infant and primary schools.  This programme provides a hot nutritious meal for children at lunch time. This is a critical service especially for poor households since many parents tend to keep their children at home if they do not have anything to give the children to eat while they are at school. 
 
The Housing Assistance Programme by SSDF provides assistance to needy and indigent individuals who live in deplorable housing conditions. Special consideration is given to the elderly, persons with disability and households with young children, as well as households affected by natural disasters and fires. 
 
The Basic Needs Trust Fund (BNTF) was established under a regional Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) initiative in 1979.  Key objectives of this fund include the following:  
• increase the productivity and income of the unemployed/underemployed 
• improve the standard of living of poor communities 
• expand and conserve the stock of economic and social infrastructure essential to future growth  	reduce the economic and social vulnerability of women and persons living with HIV/AIDS  	Improvement in health and educational facilities in deprived communities: 
o Creation of better access through the construction of roads, drains and footpaths o Installation & improvement of water supply systems in impoverish communities o Repair and construction of community-based retail facilities o Skills training and upgrading for job creation and entrepreneurship o Community empowerment 
 
Holistic Opportunities for Personal Empowerment (HOPE) is the most recent initiative by SSDF and is designed around four key aspects: 
• Reducing unemployment in the short term and creating a cyclic effect for continued employment via varied and continued projects. 
• Providing training at different level as may be determined by any assessment carried out under the auspices of HOPE. 
• Personal Development undertakings/exercises with a view to providing a life skills training facets of the program using soft skills and vocational training. 
• Health with a view to improving and promoting healthy lifestyles practices focusing on the administration of servicing, diagnosis, treatment and advice. 
  
The program is a major component of the Social Safety Net Initiative implemented by the Government. Unlike similar programs HOPE is seeking not to be welfare oriented but to address the immediate needs of the targeted group(s) while simultaneously equipping them with resources required to secure and create more sustainable livelihood opportunities. 
 
The Slope Stabilisation Programme is a low technology program which focuses on stabilizing and reducing landslide risk in poor communities which are particularly vulnerable to landslides. Financing is provided for constructing drains and retrofitting homes with rain gutters and down pipes. 
 
Koudmein Ste Lucie is a holistic intervention program designed to give Psycho-Social support to families living in extreme poverty. This program allows the agency to pool its resources, coordinate its services and build social networks for the: 
• Eradication of extreme poverty 
• Implementation of comprehensive and social protection programs and 
• Reduction of poverty and vulnerability in Saint Lucia specifically in the communities highlighted by The Country Poverty Assessment as being highly vulnerable and indigent. 
 
Through this outreach, specially trained family social workers, support counselors and community officers maintain regular visitations with indigent households over a 2-year period, building close relationships and becoming a conduit through which support is administered. The families commit to participating in all the initiatives and programmes geared towards the improvement of their quality of life in areas of health, education, family dynamics, housing, work and income. These areas of intervention are considered to be the pillars which allow families access to essential services and opportunities to get out of poverty. 
 
Saint Lucia has a number of social safety net programmes, which if reconfigured could address critical risks faced by the population. Although the elements of an appropriate safety net are present, there is a need to strengthen and rationalise programmes to ensure that they better address priority vulnerabilities. Coverage of target groups is low for Public Assistance, student support schemes, and programmes for vulnerable infants and young children and efforts to expand coverage will be necessary. Given limited fiscal space, meeting challenges will require a reallocation of budget toward areas with relatively high returns and away from areas with relatively low returns.  The SSDF accounts for the largest share of social assistance spending. In contrast, Public Assistance absorbs about 11% of social assistance expenditures. Student welfare assistance and school feeding take up less than 5% respectively.   
 
The eradication of extreme poverty, promotion of gender equality, empowerment of women, youth and people with disabilities, are at the core of Saint Lucia’s MTDS and sectoral policies and strategies and these priorities are in compliance with the principle of leaving no one behind. Accordingly, the Government is committed to improving the effectiveness of social programs and on expanding them to cover more citizens in need. In addition, the Government of Saint Lucia is guided by a Constitution that explicitly safeguards fundamental human rights and freedom for every citizen.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         
 4.0          Progress on Goals and Targets 
 
This section of the report captures Saint Lucia’s progress in implementing the nine sustainable development goals selected nationally for review. The selected goals are inclusive of the six goals [ G4 G8 G10 G13 G16 G17 ] to be reviewed in depth during the HLPF 2019, the four [G3 G4 G8 G16] that align with Saint Lucia’s Medium Term Development Strategy and three [G4 G3 G8] of the priority goals identified by Civil Society and the Private Sector in Saint Lucia. 
 
An overview of the ongoing initiatives, programmes, plans and policies of each goal under review will be preceded by a snapshot of progress represented in a tabular outline with the following reference as guide. 
 
Column Reference Indicator The name of the indicator and its unit of measurement SDG target The corresponding SDG target for the listed indicator Level of target Currently not all of the SDG indicators are available and measurable in Saint Lucia. Therefore the following relevant general indicators have been substituted to track progress: 
{1} denotes national strategy indicators  
{2} denotes CARICOM Core Indicators  
{3} denotes SDG indicators from the 2030 Agenda. Measurement of progress to date The numerical measure of national progress to target and the year of measurement  2030 target The target provided in the SDGs or the national strategy Indicator Coverage Symbolic representation of national progress to target Row Reference   Target has been met  Target is on the way to being met  Work in progress  No value determined/no data available  
 
 
 
SDG 3:  
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all, at all ages 
 
 
 
 
Indicators Maternal mortality ratio (deaths per 100,000 live births) 3.1 1,2,3 52.63 2017 <70  Proportion of births attended by skilled personnel 1,2,3 99 100  Under 5 mortality rate (per 1,000 live births) 3.2 1, 2,3  25  Neonatal mortality rate 3.2 1,2,3  12  Tuberculosis incidence per 100,000 population 3.3 1,2,3 2.8 0  Suicide rate, female (per 100,000 people) Suicide rate, male (per 100,000 people) 3.4 1,2 0.5 1.6 1/3  Contraceptive prevalence, any method (% of married or in-union women of reproductive age, 15–49 years) 3.7 1,2  100  Adolescent birth rate (aged 10–14 years; aged 15–19 years) per 1,000 women in that age group 3.7 1,2,3 31.0 0  Mortality rate attributed to household and ambient air pollution, per 100,000 3.9 1,2,3 30   Mortality rate attributed to unsafe water, sanitation and hygiene services (per 100,000 population) 3.9 1,2,3 0.6   The Ministry of Health and Wellness has the constitutional responsibility for the regulation the health sector in Saint Lucia. The Public Sector delivers healthcare services through 34 health centers, two polyclinics, two district hospitals and one General Hospital and one parastatal hospital. All of which are administered through public funds. 
Saint Lucia’s citizenry is also served by a number of private primary care providers and one private hospital. Non-Governmental Organizations and not for profit agencies also provide health care services on island, with a focus on specific conditions or specific target groups, which limits the range of the patients covered. 
Saint Lucia faces challenges in the form of natural disasters and climate change, which have health implications. Climate change leads to rising temperatures, changes in rainfall patterns, and more and longer periods of extreme weather, with implications for water-borne and vector-borne diseases and food security. 
New and emerging diseases have begun to impact Saint Lucia’s health sector and in turn has highlighted gaps in public health preparedness and response. Despite the increase in new and emerging diseases, noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) continue to be responsible for a growing burden of disease. Analysis of claims data from the National Insurance Corporation (NIC), of which 70 percent of Saint Lucia’s employed are active members, show that since 2009, the share of claimants paid for sickness benefits have increased, as has the average amount of sickness benefit paid. This implies that there could be a substantial productivity loss in the economy due to illness.  
Against the backdrop of limited fiscal space, a double burden of disease, emerging new diseases, and a service delivery system unable to adequately meet population needs, the Government of Saint Lucia has initiated the process of health sector reform in the country. The government in collaboration with the Word Bank Group intends to roll out an essential package of health services through a new unit (National Health Insurance Unit within the Ministry of Helath) formed for this purpose. 
The unit will also seek to develop and implement a national health financing mechanism to fund the delivery of these services, while improving the efficiency and sustainability of current financing and identifying new sources of revenue for the sector. The reform effort prioritizes the strengthening of the primary level of care by introducing financial incentives to enhance service delivery at the primary health care level, improve health infrastructure to ensure the primary health care level is properly outfitted to provide the necessary care services stemming from the complexities of a double burden of disease, and improving preparedness and response for public health emergencies through improvements in care integration at the primary level. 
The reform will have to take place with the appropriate alignment of Goal 3, in order to maximize the benefits to people by achieving the set goals. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
SDG 4: 
Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong 
learning opportunities for all 
 
 
 
Indicators Gross enrolment ratio, pre-primary (% of preschool-age children) 
 4.1 1 80% 2017/18 100  Gross enrolment ratio, primary (% of primary school-age population) 4.1 1 101% 2017/18 100  National mean performance per subject in Grade 2 National Assessment (%) 
English Language 
Maths 4.1 1  
 
62.4 
57.7 2018  
 
100 
100  National mean performance per subject in Grade 4 National Assessment (%) 
Language Arts 
Mathematics 4.1 1  
60 
50.6 2018 100  Transition rate from Common Entrance to Form 1%) 4.1 1 96.2 2018 100  Male leavers at the primary school level (%) 4.1 1 0.8 2016/17 0  Female leavers at the primary school level 4.1 1 0.5 2016/17 0  Gross enrolment ratio, secondary (% of secondary school-age population) 4.1 1 92.6 2017/18 
 100  Gross enrolment ratio, tertiary (% of tertiary school-age population) 4.1 1 21% 2017/18 100  Enrolment and capacity in primary schools – surplus capacity (%) 4.1 1 45.3 2017/18 0  Percentage share of girls and boys in total enrolment in primary schools in Saint Lucia (%) 
Girls 
Boys 4.1 1 
  
 
50 
50  
 
2017/18 100 Boys' enrolment in secondary schools (# over 5 years in school) 4.2 1 5,751 2017/18   Girls' enrolment in secondary schools (# over 5 years in school) 4.2 1 5,800  Enrolment and capacity in secondary schools – surplus capacity (%) 4.3 1 21 2017/18 0  Male dropouts at the secondary school level (%) 4.3 1 1.6  
2016/17 0  Female dropouts at the secondary school level (%) 4.3 1 1.0 0 Population with at least some secondary education (% ages 25 and older) 4.3 1,2,3 45.9 2017 100  Population with at least some secondary education, male (% ages 25 and older) 4.3 1,2,3 42 2017 100  Population with at least some secondary education, female (% ages 25 and older) 4.3 1,2,3 48.2 2017 100  Proportion of schools with access to: (a) electricity; (b) the Internet for pedagogical purposes; (c) computers for pedagogical purposes; (d) basic drinking water; (f) single-sex basic sanitation facilities; and (g) basic handwashing facilities (as per the WASH indicator definitions)) 4.a 3 >90% 2017/18   Proportion of teachers in: (a) pre-primary; (b) primary; (c) lower secondary; and (d) upper secondary education who have received at least the minimum organized teacher training (e.g. pedagogical training) pre-service or in-service required for teaching at the relevant level in a 4.c1 1,3 >90% 2017/18   given country 20 | P a g e 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicators Legal frameworks in place to promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination based on sex 5.1 3  2017 0  Elimination of violence by age and type of violence by place of occurrence 5.2 3  2017 0  Proportion of girls and women between 20 and 24 years who were married or in a union before age 18 5.3 3 8 2017 0  Adolescent birth rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19) 5.3 1 40.5 2017   Proportion of seats held by women in parliament and in local government (%) 5.5 1,3 20.7 2017   Proportion of women in managerial positions (%) 5.5 1,3 53.8 2017   Contraceptive prevalence, any method (% of married or in-union women of reproductive age, 15–49 years) 5.6 1 55 2017   Unmet need for family planning (% of married or in-union women of reproductive age, 15–49 years) 5.6 1 17 2017   Customary law guaranteeing women’s equal rights to land ownership and/or control 5.a 3  2017    
 The Ministry of Education has responsibility for the regulation of Saint Lucia’s education sector. Saint 
Lucia’s education system has undergone significant changes and improvements in the past two decades and now assures that all children receive a progressive, quality education to prepare them for the modern workplace or to pursue advanced studies.  
The 2015-2020 Education Sector Development Plan (ESDP) highlights the nurturing of partnerships with parents and the community, empowering teachers and learners by providing technological resources, and strengthening accountability systems. This plan also promotes human equality, individual autonomy, democratic values, ethics, morality, social justice, and strong respect for a healthy and productive society.  
There are seventy-five (75) primary schools and twenty-four (24) secondary schools on island. Over 95 percent of Saint Lucia’s children aged three to five attend one of the island’s more than 150 preschools or 33-day care centers. Compulsory education begins at age five.  
Primary education consists of a three-year Infant programme (grades 1 – 3) followed by four years of Primary instruction (grades 4-7). Some communities have separate Infant and Primary schools while others are integrated and referred to as combined schools. At the end of the seventh grade, students take the Common Entrance Examination (CEE) to determine placement for additional compulsory schooling at the secondary level.  
At the tertiary level, the Sir Arthur Lewis Community College offers two-year certificated degrees in a range of academic and vocational areas. The University of the West Indies operates and “open campus” in Saint Lucia which provides for the first two years of a degree program after which students  are eligible to complete their studies at the main campuses in either Trinidad and Tobago, Jamaica or Barbados.  
The 1997 Saint Lucia Education Act requires all students to remain in school until 16 years of age; the Universal Secondary School Act (2006/7) assures every student a secondary school placement where they complete five years of basic studies (Forms 1-5). In addition to the traditional secondary school programme, Saint Lucia provides vocational education through a three-year Senior Primary Programme or through the CARE School, both focus on preparing students for future technical jobs. 
The introduction of Universal Secondary Education (USE) in 2006/07 was a great accomplishment for the Government of Saint Lucia.  The implementation of USE addressed an inequity in the system where only students who succeeded the Common Entrance Examination at the end of primary school went to a secondary school.3   Nonetheless, the USE has also revealed certain deficiencies in the education system.  There is gender disparity at the secondary and tertiary levels as females continue to dominate in terms of performance and enrolment figures at post-secondary and tertiary levels.   
Gender disparities also exist in the choices of subjects taken at those levels.  Males outnumber females in the subjects (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) STEM, while females outnumber males in subjects traditionally associated with care giving.  National and regional high stakes examinations continue to indicate deficiencies in literacy, numeracy and technology.  Also, the proportion of learners achieving their full potential or achieving adequate skills remains small. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SDG 5 
Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
 
 
Indicators Legal frameworks in place to promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination based on sex 5.1 3  2017 0  Elimination of violence by age and type of violence by place of occurrence 5.2 3  2017 0  Proportion of girls and women between 20 and 24 years who were married or in a union before age 18 5.3 3 8 2017 0  Adolescent birth rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19) 5.3 1 40.5 2017   Proportion of seats held by women in parliament and in local government (%) 5.5 1,3 20.7 2017   Proportion of women in managerial positions (%) 5.5 1,3 53.8 2017   Contraceptive prevalence, any method (% of married or in-union women of reproductive age, 15–49 years) 5.6 1 55 2017   Unmet need for family planning (% of married or in-union women of reproductive age, 15–49 years) 5.6 1 17 2017   Customary law guaranteeing women’s equal rights to land ownership and/or control 5.a 3  2017    
 
The Division of Gender Relations in the Ministry of Education, Innovation, Gender Relations and 
Sustainable Development, is mandated to facilitate an enabling environment that address gender imbalances through policies, programmes and other initiatives promoting equity and social justice. Its programme strategies include:  
 i. 	Developing and implementing programmes to increase capacity and awareness on gender issues  ii. 	Developing and implementing a comprehensive national response to gender-based violence  iii. 	Promoting the use of gender statistics/data to inform programmes and project development  
iv. Supporting other agencies’/ institutions’ programmes that address gender discrimination and inequity.  
More than 90 percent of females in Saint Lucia attend primary school, and more than 75 percent of them are expected to attend secondary school. These figures are comparable to males attending primary school and the expectation that at least 80 percent of males will attend secondary school.  Females make up more than 80 percent of the student population in the Sir Arthur Lewis Community College, the single community college on the island.  Girls’ education in Saint Lucia has been on the rise over the last decade with the implementation of several new programs and pushes for female education and careers. Girls’ educational attainment is also reflected in their share of employment.  
A 2016 labour market survey shows that women occupy a high measure of senior positions in the labour force in both the Public and Private Sectors. The Prime Minister’s Cabinet currently contains four female Ministers. The posts of Head of State, speaker of the House of Parliament, Attorney General, Leader of the Opposition have also been held by women in Saint Lucia. 
Despite the progress in education and in the labour force, women in Saint Lucia are still exposed to specific gender challenges including: teenage pregnancy; responsibility for children, often as single parents; low levels of child support payments and difficulties in collecting child support; very high levels of youth unemployment; domestic and gender-based violence; and inadequate pensions and income in their senior years. Men also face specific challenges including: elevated secondary school drop-out rates; very high levels of youth unemployment.  
Gender-based violence including violence against women and children continues to be a challenge to the full attainment of gender equality in Saint Lucia. National efforts to mitigate against such violence include the passage of legislation such as, the Domestic Violence Summary Proceedings Act (1994), the revision of the Criminal Code and the implementation of the Labour Code: Equality of Treatment in Employment in 2006. The social support for victims and survivors include the establishment of the Family 
Court in 1997 and the Women’s Support Centre in 2002. The augmentation of services provided by other 
State agencies, such as the establishment of the Vulnerable Persons Unit in the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force with specific responsibility for investigating sexual offences and child sexual abuse cases also contribute to the national support system. A number of NGOs and Civil Society Organizations, including among others, the St. Lucia Crisis Centre, Positive Reactions over Secrets and Fear (PROSAF) and Raise Your Voice Saint Lucia, also provide support. 
In an effort to address gaps and challenges the Government of Saint Lucia has sought support from the Caribbean Development Bank to enhance its capacity to systematically address gender equality priorities in its planning and programming processes. The project specifically aims at building the capacity of the relevant Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) to incorporate a substantive gender dimension in the country’s National Strategic Development Plan, strategic vision and medium-term development plans.  The project began in May 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SDG 7   
Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
 
 
 
Indicators Proportion of population with electricity 7.1 1,3 66,460 2018 100%  Renewable energy share in total final energy consumption 7.2 1,2,3 3.3% 2018 35% 
(2020)  Total installed renewable energy 7.2 1 3 2018   Renewable as percentage of total installed generating capacity 7.2 1 3.2% 2018   Energy intensity measured in terms of primary energy and GDP 7.3 1,3 2,727 2017 2x global rate  International financial flows in support of clean energy research and development and renewable energy production 7.a 3  2018   Investments in energy efficiency as a proportion of GDP 7.b 3  2018    While the SDGs implementation commenced in 2015, it is worth nothing that the Government of Saint 
Lucia in 2014, put forward refined energy targets which aimed at an energy penetration target of 35% and an energy efficiency target of 20% reduction consumption in the public sector by 2020.  In keeping with these aims the country took other steps which included submitting an action plan to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in 2015 and ratifying the Paris Agreement in April 2016.  The government recognised that in order to achieve its energy and climate goals a definitive and clear transition strategy and process should be adopted and implemented all while ensuring cost effectiveness for Saint Lucians. 
 
The energy sector, particularly electricity, is a key contributor to economic activity and growth as it is essential for many sectors to thrive. While electricity is supplied reliably in Saint Lucia, it remains almost completely dependent on diesel-based generation, resulting in high electricity tariffs and substantial price volatility due to the exposure to world market oil prices. The volatile and high cost of electricity4  is a major impediment to investment that erodes the country’s competitiveness, even as it seeks to attract a larger share of tourism revenues. 
 
Saint Lucia is highly dependent on imported fossil fuels to meet its energy demand and apart from limited usage of combustible renewables and waste, virtually all of its energy is imported, mainly from Trinidad and Tobago. Notwithstanding this situation, the island state has significant indigenous resources and potential for wind, solar, and geothermal energy. The dependence on oil for electricity generation and other energy needs leads to highly volatile prices in the sector as a result of the pass-through of diesel oil cost to the consumer. The overwhelming dependence on imported oil for electricity generation and other energy needs leads to highly volatile prices in the sector, even though the island state has significant resource potential for wind, solar, and geothermal energy which are largely untapped. 
Saint Lucia has completed initial geothermal surface exploration surveys, which indicate the presence of a possible geothermal resource with the potential of supporting an estimated 30 MW of generation capacity. To this end, with assistance from the World Bank Saint Lucia has embarked on a Renewable Energy Sector Development Project.  The project will enable a process leading to the implementation of Saint Lucia’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) adopted in connection with the 2015 COP 21 Paris climate change agreements. The development of indigenous geothermal energy will reduce the need for fossil fuel imports, thereby contributing to greater fiscal sustainability. More stable and cheaper electricity will translate into lower electricity costs for household consumers and for the productive sectors, thereby increasing their competitiveness. Presently, Saint Lucia’s diesel power plant is located at one location, making power supply vulnerable to extreme climate events, such as hurricanes. With the introduction of a geothermal plant, it would enhance Saint Lucia’s climate resilience through lowering the risk of energy supply disruptions due to extreme weather events. 
 
The country has been engaged with several partners in renewable energy-related activities all aimed at increasing the share in the energy mix by investing in the production of cleaner, more indigenous energy sources to become more energy secure.  Among the efforts being pursued are the increased use of solar, geothermal and wind energy exploration, among others.   
 
In 2016, the Government of Saint Lucia created the National Utilities Regulatory Commission (NURC) to oversee and regulate the electricity system in Saint Lucia.  The Government also developed the National Energy Transition Strategy (NETS). The NETS is an energy transition action plan informed by independent, technical analysis that paves the road for a sustainable, reliable, cost-effective, and equitable electricity sector using the island’s local resources. This process, independent of any particular technology, yielded a detailed 20-year strategy as well as a suite of optimal near-term projects. 
 
Exploratory drilling for geothermal resources in the Sulphur Springs area and the Piton Management Area was initiated in 2018. Funding from the Global Environmental Facility, the SIDS DOCK Support Program for the Geothermal Resource Development Project, the Government of New Zealand and the Clinton Climate Initiative has made this project possible. 
 
In 2018, the CDB provided financing for replacing about 21,500 streetlights in Saint Lucia with lightemitting diode (LED) lamps. This project is set to reduce St. Lucia’s street-lighting electricity bill by 58 percent, thereby freeing up funds for more development initiatives. The Government of Saint Lucia and St. Lucia Electricity Services Limited contributed additional financing for the installation 
The St. Lucia Electricity Services Limited (LUCELEC) 3MW Solar Farm in La Tourney, Vieux Fort is now feeding solar energy into the island’s electricity grid. The 3-megawatt solar farm will generate 7 million kilowatt-hours (or units) of electricity per year, which is about 1.3% of the electricity generated from LUCELEC’s Cul De Sac Power Plant. It will reduce the annual volume of fuel purchased by LUCELEC by about 300 thousand gallons. LUCELEC uses approximately 19 million gallons of fuel per year. 
 
This year the Government will begin implementing a project under the 2nd Cycle of the UAE Caribbean Renewable Energy Fund. The project will see the construction of a solar port equipped with electric vehicle charging stations and solar powered streetlights at the Hewanorra international Airport and in Vieux Fort.  In addition, 2 schools will be retrofitted with solar photovoltaic systems. 
 
This project will not only help the Government realise financial savings in its energy consumption bill but will also reduce the total quantity of oil imported into Saint Lucia and reduce overall national energy consumption.  The reduction in energy demand will also contribute to Saint Lucia’s obligations under the Paris Agreement, to reduce greenhouse gases.  The investments in energy efficiency are continuing in an effort to meet the 2030 target. 
 
 
 
SDG 8 
Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
 
 
 
Indicators Annual growth rate of real GDP 8.1 1,2,3 3% 2017  7% growth  	 Annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person 8.2 1,2,3 0.46% 2017/
18   Proportion of youth (aged 15 to 24 years) not in education, employment or training 8.6 1,2,3  2017   Proportion of youth (aged 15 to 24 years) not in employment or training 8.6 1,2 45% 2017 0  Proportion and number of children aged 7 to 15 years engaged in child labour by age (%) 8.7 1,2,3 3.3 2017 0  Tourism direct GDP as a proportion of total GDP and in growth rate 8.9 1,2,3 41.8% 2017   (a)Number of commercial bank branches per 100,000 adults, and (b) number of automated teller machines (ATMs) per 100,000 adults 8.10 3 24 
43.4 2019 
2017   Existence of a developed and operationalised national strategy for youth employment as a distinct strategy or as a part of a national employment strategy 8.b 3      
The Economic activity to be covered in goal 8 falls under the responsibility of the three separate 
Ministerial portfolios of the Ministry of Labour, The Ministry of Finance, Economic Growth and Job Creation and the Ministry of Economic Development; with each focused on national programmes, plans and policies that promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all in Saint Lucia. 
As Saint Lucia continues to advance our national development planning and delivery processes there have been key developments to accelerate progress. 
A National Integrated Planning and Programme Unit - (NIPP) was established in September of 2018 within the Department of Finance. It has a mandate to establish a new evidence-based national infrastructure planning and programme paradigm across all relevant government agencies. The programmatic work of the unit will focus on both economic and social infrastructures; and cover areas of economic change such as transportation networks, communication networks, power grids and other major utilities.  The social infrastructure focus will relate to core areas of social change, such as the national housing stock, schools, hospitals, churches, police and fire stations.  
The NIPP will define the overarching vision, strategy and roadmap for the development of the national infrastructure agenda, by assessing the current and future infrastructural needs of agencies and the overall public service and ensuring that financial and capital resources align with national priorities. The key activities of the NIPP will include the following:  
• The collection and categorizing of all existing infrastructure data within one central database to include current status and performance;  
• Understanding the economics and governance of national infrastructure;  
• The undertaking of a Fast Track Analysis of the existing and current planned infrastructure systems for Saint Lucia. This analysis will determine current infrastructure performance, as well as assess the ability of existing infrastructure systems to respond to the long term development needs and objectives;  
• Undertaking national infrastructure vulnerability, risk (including climate change related risks) and resilience analysis of all major national infrastructure;  
• Determining the likely stresses of planned projects on existing national infrastructure grids such as water supply, electricity, road networks, garbage and sewage treatments and undertake stress test simulations on national infrastructure grids and their other components;  
• Conducting a system-of-system analysis capability to inform long term planning, investment and design of national infrastructure. 
Saint Lucia is also focused on creating the enabling environment for both productivity and competitiveness, with a number of initiatives and reforms being implemented.  Some of these are highlighted below:  
(1) Providing the framework for Monitoring, Measurement and Reporting on Competitiveness - The Government of Saint Lucia through the National Competitiveness and Productivity Council (NCPC) has partnered with the Compete Caribbean Partnership Facility to formulate a Competitiveness Agenda that will seek to identify appropriate structural reforms in an effort to boost productivity and competitiveness levels.  The Agenda is expected to be finalized by December 2019 and will provide a framework by which all initiatives, reforms and actions which impact on productivity and competitiveness will be monitored and measured.  The Agenda will employ international best practices by using parameters set by international agencies such as the Inter-American Competitiveness Network and the World Economic Forum (WEF).  The WEF has identified 12 pillars of competitiveness namely:  Institutions, Infrastructure, ICT Adoption, Macroeconomic Stability, Health, Skills, Product market, Labour Market, Financial System, Market Size, Business Dynamism and Innovation Capability.   
 
(2) A Productivity Tool that will allow businesses to measure productivity levels – As part of its mandate to measure productivity levels in the country, the NCPC will be distributing a productivity tool or ProTool through the various Business Associations who will provide assistance in facilitating productivity measurements for businesses.  The tool is easy to administer, can be used to track progress and act as a catalyst for the implementation of efficient and effective processes within businesses.     
The tool assesses productivity levels and provides a historical trend that allows businesses to measure and monitor productivity growth over time.  It also provides qualitative measurements in other areas including: leadership and management capabilities, productive workplace innovation and technology, productivity improvement and measurement, human resource upgrading, production and standards, business processes, sales and marketing and, raw materials – specifically for the manufacturing sector.  The ProTool will be distributed during the course of 2019.  
 
(3) Enhancing the Business Environment – A number of reforms have been identified by the Government through the Doing Business Taskforce as critical for enhancing the business environment.  Highlighted below are two reforms being coordinated by the NCPC that are at an advanced stage namely the Secured Transactions in Movable Properties and Insolvency as well as other reforms coordinated by other government agencies and the Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court:  
a. Secured Transactions in Movable Properties – This reform will enable businesses as well as individuals to access loan financing from financial institutions using non-traditional forms of collateral such as equipment, inventory, accounts receivables, vehicles and other assets that are considered to be of value to the business.  The legislation for this reform has been drafted.  In addition, an online Security Registry will accompany this legislation to provide information to creditors on secured interests in those movable collateral.  This legislative framework is expected to be in place by the end of 2019.  
b. New Insolvency and Bankruptcy Legislation – This new piece of legislation will be a unified regime that caters to both businesses and individuals.  It will allow for an insolvent person or business to get a breathing space from their creditors by putting forward to the court – a debt restructuring plan in the case of business failure or when individuals cannot meet their financial obligations to creditors.  This new legislative framework will also make provision for the licensing and supervising of trustees as well as instituting a Supervisor of Insolvency.    
c. Doing Business Reform Project coordinated by the Department of Commerce - a project was recently approved by the Compete Caribbean Partnership Facility to address interventions in the following areas: enforcement of contracts, protecting minority shareholders, building awareness in the area of online payment of taxes and alternative dispute resolution. 
d. Enhancing trade facilitation through the implementation of a Port Community Single Window – discussions have resumed on the implementation of a Port Community Single Window for Saint Lucia.  This is an important project for the Doing Business Task Force.   
 
 
(4) Formulation of an Innovation Policy in partnership with the Ministry of Education, Innovation, Gender Relations and Sustainable Development – Given the importance of innovation to productivity, competitiveness and growth, it is imperative that concerted and deliberate efforts are taken to build an efficient innovation ecosystem for Saint Lucia.  This policy will also complement the launch of the: “Decade of Research and Innovation”.   
 
(5) Productivity Awareness Week (PAW) - The NCPC since 2014 hosts an annual observance of Productivity Awareness Week.  The objective of PAW is to bring to the nation’s attention during that period, the various challenges that must be confronted and resolved in an effort to raise productivity levels and an attempt to change mind-sets that aim for better work ethics and standards.  PAW 2018 was held under the theme: “Innovation for Greater Productivity” and comprised the following activities: display of innovative services by participating agencies, training in customer service, research symposium, forum on financial innovation addressing new currency trends and forum on innovation in ICTs. 
 
 
 
SDG 10 
Reduce inequality within and among countries 
 
While Saint Lucia does not currently have sufficient data to assess the status of the indicators and targets of goal 10 in tabular form; the configuration three years ago of the Ministry of Equity, Social Justice, Local Government and Empowerment, is a testament to the Government’s commitment to social, economic and political inclusion and ensuring equal opportunity for all.  
 
The Ministry’s mandate is to promote, support and facilitate the participation, development and organization of Saint Lucia’s people, in utilizing their resources to effect self-directed change towards the economic, social, cultural, political and spiritual advancement of themselves, their communities and the nation. The Ministry’s programme and policy work is carried out through the various departments and divisions, including but not limited to the following:- 
 
BELFUND - James Belgrave Micro Enterprise Development Fund Inc. 
The fund’s mission is to create the conditions for the empowerment of the poor, through fostering sustainable micro enterprise development, by providing access to credit, enterprise training, business support, technical assistance and other support services. 
 
The Human Services Division 
The mission of the Division is to enhance the psychosocial functioning of children, families, older persons, individuals, and other vulnerable groups. This is done through advocacy, research, counseling and other social work therapeutic intervention strategies, which focus on family preservation and the provision of skills for self-empowerment. 
 
The New Beginning Transit Home 
The New Beginnings Transit Home is a temporary residential place of safety for children between the ages of 2 – 16 years who are victims of child abuse and severe neglect and who are in need of care and protection. This service works closely with the National Foster Care and Adoption Services to ensure that children are returned to where they thrive best: in secure and loving families. The Home is a sub-division of the Division of Human Services and Family Affairs in Saint Lucia. 
 
One of the primary tasks to be undertaken by the Programme and Policy unit in the Ministry is the development of the appropriate capacity for statistical collection, storage and dissemination and the requisite analysis, to inform the national development plans and processes. 
 
The fledging Ministry is dedicated to its mandate and its significant role not only in the successful implementation of Goal 10 but that of Saint Lucia’s national development priorities. 
 
SDG 13 
Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
 
 
 
 
Indicators Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population 13.1 1,3 2 1990 – 2014   Adopt and implement local disaster risk reduction strategies in line with national disaster risk reduction strategies 13.1 3  2017 ongoing  Integrated strategic plans to adapt to adverse impacts of climate change, foster climate resilience and low greenhouse emissions 13.2 3  2017 100%  Integrated mitigation, adaptation, impact reduction and early warning systems into primary, secondary and tertiary school curricula 13.3 3  2017 100%  Strengthening of institutional, systemic and individual capacity building to implement adaptation, mitigation and technology transfer, and development actions 13.3 3 ongoing 2017   Amount of support, including finance, technology and capacitybuilding for mechanisms for raising capacities for effective climate change related planning and management, including focussing on women, youth and local and marginalised communities 13.b 3 ongoing 2017    Saint Lucia is at risk to many natural hazards particularly hurricanes, excess rainfall events, flooding and drought.  In recent years, there have been death associated with natural disasters, especially during the Hurricane Tomas event which claimed approximately 14 lives.  Ongoing public education and hurricane preparedness, includes in tips for reducing the loss of life for example, moving to hurricane shelters and making necessary preparation to property.  Community disaster planning is very strong in Saint Lucia.  There is a network on local disaster committees that work closely with the National Emergency Management Office (NEMO). 
 
According to the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) to prioritize disaster risk reduction and the impacts of climate change the Government of Saint Lucia engages in5: 
• Strengthening public institutions to efficiently execute a comprehensive and multi-sectoral nationwide disaster risk reduction program, including a disaster risk financing strategy;  
• Introducing legal and policy reforms to increase climate and disaster resilience in priority sectors;  
• Implementing a more diverse set of risk finance instruments to withstand the fiscal shocks associated with natural hazard events;  
• Ensuring the public is educated about natural hazards, including preventive and mitigation measures; and,  
• Directing resources toward priority sectors highly vulnerable to the impacts of disasters and climate change, such as transport, education and health. 
 
Further, Saint Lucia is a member of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF), a regional risk-pooling mechanism for Caribbean countries to provide liquidity after devastating natural hazards including hurricanes, earthquakes and excess rainfall events. In 2016, the CCRIF around $30 million United States Dollars to four member countries that were affected by Hurricane Matthew, including Saint Lucia. 
In 2019, the Cabinet of Ministers approved the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) 2018-2028; Sectoral Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan for Water (Water SASAP) 2018-2028; Sectoral Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan for Agriculture (Agriculture SASAP) 2018-2028; Sectoral Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan for Fisheries (Fisheries SASAP) 2018-2028; Climate Change Communications Strategy; and Monitoring and Evaluation Plan of Saint Lucia’s National Adaptation Planning Process.  These plans contain key priority actions for adaptation to climate change and building the resilience of the sectors. 
 
With respect to mitigation, for Saint Lucia, actions are focused on electricity generation, energy efficiency, renewable energy and transport.  The country has a Sustainable Energy Plan (2001) focused on the maintenance and growth of the energy sector; a National Energy Policy (2010) for exploitation of new and indigenous sources of energy, in addition to the promotion of energy conservation and efficiency.  In 2015, as part of its support to the Paris Agreement, Saint Lucia submitted its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) which listed the country’s voluntary efforts towards achieving the objectives of the UNFCCC.  Subsequently, the previously mentioned National Energy Transition Strategy (NETS) was prepared in 2017 which is geared towards a sustainable, reliable, cost-effective and equitable electricity future for Saint Lucia.  Key to achieving these goals are the putting in place the necessary enabling environment which has commenced as the Saint Lucia Electricity Supply act has been reviewed and updated.  
 
The Government of Saint Lucia has also benefited in several capacity building initiatives in climate change mitigation and adaptation early warning systems.  The country has received hydro-meteorological equipment under several projects and associated training.  Initiatives to build the resilience of schools have also been undertaken since several schools around the island serve as hurricane shelters.  Earthquake and tsunami preparation and drills have also been undertaken in schools around the island in preparation for such hazards. 
 
The UNFCCC and other Rio Conventions provides financial support to undertake reporting such as the 
National Communications, Biennial Update Reports (BURs) and National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plans and National Reports.  The country has benefitted from training and capacity building activities under the UNFCCC as it continues to work towards reduction of GHGs and honouring its commitments under the Paris Agreement.  The country also continues to participate in the Conference of the Parties of the Rio Conventions to ensure that its voice is reflected in the international negotiations.  In addition, the country  benefits from activities and support provided by agencies and partners such as the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO), the Caribbean Institute for Meteorology and Hydrology, the University of the West Indies with respect to research and other partners such as the GIZ, World Bank, Global Environment Facility (GEF), among others. 
 
Some specific project actions that the Government is pursuing which all contribute to achieving targets under Goal 13 includes the following6: 
• Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) – aimed at designing a NAMA for increased renewable energy and energy efficiency solutions and technologies in selected school buildings (Green Schools) in Saint Lucia; 
• Green Architecture Promotion Pilot (GAPP) toward Building Resilience to the Adverse Effects of Climate Change – aimed to improve national energy efficiency and reduce national greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, through capacity building in green design and documentation and promotion of best practices in green design; 
• Disaster Vulnerability Reduction Project (DVRP), including Pilot Programme for Climate Resilience (PPCR) - aims to reduce urgent disaster vulnerability and increase long-term climate resilience in Saint Lucia by addressing the multi-faceted risks associated with hydrometeorological events. The Project is also focused on emergency reconstruction activities and aims to contribute to strengthening disaster risk management and supporting investments and capacity building activities that foster disaster resilience; 
• Promoting Mango Biodiversity in Saint Lucia towards Sustainable Land Management, Enhanced Food and Nutrition Security and Sustainable Livelihoods in the Face of Climate Change – aimed at building community and natural resources resilience to climate change impacts within vulnerable watersheds in Saint Lucia to improve Sustainable Land use Management (SLM) and capacity to adapt to climate change impacts through the cultivation of mangoes on farm and forest lands.  Additionally, the intervention seeks to promote and preserve mango genetic diversity and maximise on its potential for soil stabilisation, provision of wind barriers, water conservation and carbon sequestration. It will also support agricultural diversification and sustainable livelihoods, promoting food and nutrition security, especially given the adverse impacts of climate change on traditional crops (flooding, drought, pests and diseases, physical damage); 
• Coastal Protection for Climate Change Adaptation in the Small Island States in the Caribbean: 
Increasing the Resilience to Climate Change and Natural Hazards, and Reducing the Rate of Coastal Erosion for Pigeon Island National Landmark and Pointe Sable Environmental Protection Area (PSEPA) through Beach Stabilisation, Restoration & Enhancement - implementation of local adaptation measures for the sustainable improvement of coastal ecosystems relevant for climate change adaptation in Saint Lucia; 
 
Technical Assistance for the Development of Frameworks aimed at Enhancing Environmental Management - development of legislative frameworks towards improved environmental management specifically, an Environmental Management Act and Climate Change Act. 
 
 
SDG 16 
Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
 
 
 
 
 
Indicators Number of victims of intentional homicide per 1000,000 population by sex and age 16.1  19.3 2017   Proportion of children under 5 years of age whose births have been registered with a civil authority by age 16.9 1,3 100% Prior to 
2015 100%  Existence of independent human rights institutions in compliance with the Paris Principles 16.a 3 <5 2017   Saint Lucia recognizes that sustainable development cannot be realized in the absence of a just, peaceful, inclusive society; and remains resolute in its commitment to the rule of law and access to justice. 
The Ministry of Home Affairs, Justice and National Security has a mandate to promote sustainable social and economic development through innovative solutions in work processes, the handling of vital records, services to families, enactment of modern legislation; and the application of principles of correctness, timeliness and equity in the proactive enforcement of the rule of law without prejudice and compromise to the right of the individual or the society as guaranteed under the constitution. 
Saint Lucia acceded to the United Nations Convention Against Corruption in November 2011 and has made strides in implementing its provisions through the national legal regime. There is an extremely low incidence of corruption in public office, with negligible allegations of administrative graft and prosecution of public officers. 
Saint Lucia has seen its violence rate, in general, climb over the past decade, much like other countries in the Eastern Caribbean. The island serves as a transit point in the international drugs trade and has a number of domestic gangs who engage in burglary, the local drug trade and homicide.  Local gangs contribute to key crime rates, with robberies, burglaries and extortion funding domestic drug trafficking operations. Police estimates on the number of gang members are unavailable, and little information is publicly available on their socio-demographic make-up.  
 
There is a current severe back log of cases in the Saint Lucia court system, which results in an increase in the proportion of prisoners held in detention without being sentenced for a crime. While the police force enjoys a high level of public confidence, there are have been allegations of brutality and potentially unlawful killings leveled at the police in recent years. These issues, combined with inefficiencies in the judiciary have challenged Saint Lucia’s efforts to tackle crime. 
As Saint Lucia progresses in the development of its long term National Development Plan, it would be necessary to focus on the following initiatives to ensure the achievement of SDG 16: 
• Establish mechanisms and policies to strengthen the case management in the court system 
• Enhance transparency and accountability within the public sector 
• Upgrade Information Communication Technology systems to improve service delivery 
 
 
SDG 17 
Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development 
 
 
 
 
Indicators Total government revenue as a proportion of GDP, by source 17.1 1,2,3 24.3% 2017 
(est.)   Proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes 17.1 1,2,3 64% 2017 
(est.)   Net Official Development Assistance 17.2  15.23 mil 
USD 2016   FDI as a proportion of total domestic budget 17.3 1,2,3 7.54% 2017   Debt service as a proportion of export of goods and services 17.4 1,2,3 4.2% 2017   Proportion of individuals using internet (% of population) 17.8  46.7 2017   Extent of use of country-owned results frameworks and planning tools by providers of development corporation 17.15 3 92%. 2018   Proportion of sustainable development indicators produced at the national level with full disaggregation when relevant to the target, in accordance with the Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics 17.18      National Statistical Legislation that complies with the 
Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics 17.18 1,2,3 N.A. 2006 .  Dollar value of all resources made available to strengthen statistical capacity 17.19 1,2,3 2.1mil 
XCD 2018 
(est.)   Conduct of at least one population and housing census in the last 10 years and have achieved 100 % birth registration and 80% death registration 17.19  100%  100%   Saint Lucia’s limited fiscal space makes the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda a formidable task which requires significant financing as well as coordinated efforts among the Government, the private sector, civil society and international development partners.  This coordination has to be effectively connected to the meaningful commitment of all stakeholders to advancing the priorities of sustainable development; and to the various financing flows from domestic and international sources aligned with the economic, social and environmental priorities of Saint Lucia. 
Securing adequate financial resources to implement national priories remain challenging, particularly, given Saint Lucia’s classification as a Middle Income Country. This categorization impacts Saint Lucia’s eligibility to access much needed grants and concessionary loans. In addition, the lack of timely, adequate and appropriate data impedes evidence-based decision-making and effective targeting of interventions. As Saint Lucia continues to work to strengthen is 2030 Agenda implementing mechanisms, there is recognition of the urgent need to develop financing and mobilisation strategies to identify and quantify the funding gap for implementing national priorities.  
To date, Saint Lucia’s SDG implementation has been primarily resourced through the support from international development partners through loans, grants and technical assistance. The private sector and CSOs are also valuable partners but their contribution to financing SDG implementation has been limited thus far. 
Providers of development co-operation in Saint Lucia, use country-owned results frameworks and planning tools to a medium extent (approximately 50%). The 2018 Monitoring Round of the Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (GPEDC) found that 92% of the outcome objectives of new development co-operation projects and programmes align to those defined in country strategies/plans.  
However, 47% of results indicators of new projects and programmes were drawn from country-owned results frameworks and 9% of all results indicators can be monitored using data from government monitoring systems and statistics. 
 
 
 
 
                                                                         
	5.0 	Challenges 
 
 
Data 
 
One of the major structural issues impeding Saint Lucia’s implementation of the 2030 Agenda, is the lack of reliable statistical data necessary to report on selected indicators and targets.  The Central Statistical Office generates the bulk of its data through census and surveys and from administrative data provided by other agencies. There are, however, many agencies within the statistical system that collect data on their own without much supervision from the CSO. While these agencies may use internationally recognized definitions, concepts and classifications the CSO is not involved in the choice of statistical methods. Nor does the CSO monitor the quality of data generated by these agencies. Different agencies collect different types of data and currently there are no mechanisms in place to ensure that there are synergies in the data collection. There is also no single proforma for data collection in Saint Lucia. 
 
Challenges also persist in the collection, analysis and dissemination of linked economic, social and environmental data. This impedes the use of multiple sources of relevant data in macroeconomic and other policy development. As a result, information on the impact of policy across sectors and groups is not sufficiently available, and therefore not sufficiently drawn upon for planning. A contributing factor to this paucity of credible and reliable data is the lack of structured data collection and analysis processes, i.e. a “systems approach”. Data is collected in a piecemeal fashion by various agencies, usually only when funding is available.  In many instances also, the data is not analyzed beyond the purpose for which it was collected; it is not validated, and it is not regularly and systematically updated. Data collection in Saint Lucia is very much a function of the availability of funds, especially donor funds.  
 
There is need for an integrated database system in Saint Lucia. Such a system will allow for storage and dissemination of multi-sectoral data for development of macro-planning tools including, monitoring the implementation of the SDGs, and preparing Poverty Reduction Strategies and National Development Plans. Bridging that gap requires the development of a mechanism by which economic, social and environmental data are collected and analyzed within an integrated framework of evidence-based planning and governance. 
 
 
Resource Mobilization 
 
Financing the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is another significant challenge. At the national level the mobilizations and prioritization of funding - including funds provided through partnerships with international development partners, is critical. Securing adequate finical resources to implement the SDGs remains a challenge for Saint Lucia. This is particularly so given Saint Lucia’s classification as a Middle Income Country, which has graduated it beyond the eligibility for grants and confessional loans. 
 
Although the Addis Ababa Action Agenda for Financing Development establishes a strong foundation of plans and policies to support the implementation of the 2030 Agenda; without the meaningful commitment of all relevant stakeholders to advance the priorities of sustainable development, significant challenges will persist.  
 
Structural Issues 
 
 
The successful implementation of the SDGs in Saint Lucia will require a comprehensive governance framework that ensures the key requirements are available and the responsible agencies enhance cooperation and inter-agency collaboration in order to achieve this.  The Government has taken a first step with the establishment of a Cabinet appointed SDGNCC. The SDGNCC continues to evolve and enhance its critical role in the National Coordinating mechanism. There is need for more effective collaboration and coordination, between and among institutions, agencies and non-governmental stakeholders for the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
 
Saint Lucia has yet to undertake a comprehensive assessment of capacities and financial gaps in SDG implementation. In addition, a mechanism for the monitoring, reviewing, reporting and follow-up on the progress of implementation of the SDGs has not been developed. A number of SDG related activities are currently being undertaken but have not been coordinated. Public awareness levels are not high and the  progress of implementation moves at slow pace, mostly due to financial constraints. 
 

 
6.0  Next Steps and Conclusion 
 
The concurrent preparation of Saint Lucia’s VNR report and the development of the Medium-Term 
Development Strategy (2019 to 2022) have provided many lessons, highlighted meaningful successes and amplified a wide range of challenges; which provides a pivotal platform to advance Saint Lucia’s commitment to the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The national priorities that the country will pursue in the medium term, will contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the achievement of the SDGs. However work will continue to further mainstream the entire 2030 Agenda into the long-term National Development Plan and its constituent planning mechanisms. 
 
Saint Lucia recognizes that in order to efficiently and effectively implement the SDGs and achieve its national development goals, while simultaneously tackling the challenges exacerbated by our unique vulnerabilities; there are critical next steps that have to be enabled.  
 
The Mainstreaming and nationalizing of the 2030 Agenda and its 17 goals into the long term national development plans and polices, is fundamental to accelerating Saint Lucia’s implementation process. Saint Lucia is also mindful that our alignment process will have to incorporate other sustainable development frameworks, most notably the Paris Agreement, The Addis Abba Action Agenda, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Reduction and the SAMOA Pathway to ensure requisite coherence. 
 
The strengthening of the entire National Statistical System is also a critical necessity. It is clear that there is an urgent need to enhance our statistical capacity in order to produce the reliable, timely, robust and heterogeneous data needed to plan, monitor and review our development progress. In addition there is the need to establish a comprehensive national statistical database, with the technological capacity to collect, analyze and disseminate data. 
 
The expansion and enhancement of the National Coordination Mechanism for the 2030 Agenda, is another step required, to enable the reinforcement of institutional coherence and the development of the appropriate monitoring, evaluation and reporting mechanisms.  
 
A comprehensive national assessment of the means of implementation of the 2030 Agenda will require the identification of mechanisms and strategies for financing the implementation of national development plans. 
 
The strengthening and diversification of international development partnerships with regional and international agencies, academia, and countries - in line with their various commitments to sustainable development -, is another important requirement toward fast and sustained progress toward the attainment of the 2030 Agenda for Saint Lucia. 
The establishment of an effective communication and advocacy mechanism to raise awareness of the integrated nature of the SDGs and to foster the engagement of the full citizenry is required. It will also generate momentum and ensure accountability. 
 
Saint Lucia has demonstrated its commitment to implementing the 2030 Agenda, through various initiatives, policies and programmes and through the establishment of mechanisms to guide the country’s path to meaningful sustainable development. However it is clear that there is much more work to be done. The preparation of our first VNR Report has provided an invaluable opportunity for self-assessment and has laid the foundation for renewed, clear and practical actions to be taken in order to accelerate progress to sustainable and inclusive development. 
 
