HIGHLIGHTS

20 years since the devastating struggle for the restoration of independence, Timor-Leste has emerged as a democratic and peaceful country focused on state-building and accelerating progress on sustainable development. Reconciliation and inclusion have underpinned stability and the creation of the democratic process. Internal and regional reconciliation was a priority following the restoration of independence and helped unify the country. The maturing culture of democracy and respect for democratic competition demonstrated by this young nation is notable for a new country emerging from conflict. Since the referendum in 1999, Timor-Leste has undergone four democratic and peaceful elections. With plans to promote decentralisation, build institutional capacities and strengthen the justice sector, Timor-Leste aims to further consolidate peace, promote the rule of law and enhance accountability. Maintaining peace is more than just the absence of conflict, for young people, in particular, peace relates to securing their futures with decent work and tackling high rates of gender-based violence. 
Investing more in human capital is seen as a priority for sustaining development and economic growth.  The country has made important progress in health and education, with gains made in child and maternal health, as well as marked increases in the number of children attending school, with gender parity.  More effort is now required to tackle health and education disparities between municipalities, focus on quality education, and ensure vulnerable women and persons with disabilities are not left behind. More investment in human capital is needed  to contribute to reducing child stunting and food insecurity, that are notably high. Increasing efforts to improve access to improved water and sanitation, a driver of malnutrition in Timor-Leste, will also contribute to a healthy and productive population. To equip young men and women for the labour market, investment is also rapidly needed in quality secondary, vocational and higher education but also in science and technology. The nascent private sector in Timor-Leste is not sufficient to generate enough jobs for the large number of young people entering the labour market and to drive new areas of economic growth. It is therefore vital to support the growth of productive and labour-intensive industries, in particular, the agricultural sector, in order to absorb the human capital that is being built. Given that agriculture provides the largest share of employment, growth in the agricultural sector could absorb significant amount of jobs every year (World Bank, 2019a). 

The Strategic Development Plan (SDP) sets out the pathway to sustainable and inclusive development in Timor-Leste through focusing on state-building, social inclusion and economic growth. The country’s national strategy for development outlines an integrated package of interventions centred on strengthening social capital and investing in infrastructure and economic development. Building on the priorities outlined in the SDP, the process of developing the Voluntary National Review has identified four main areas for accelerating progress on the SDP in order to achieve the SDGs. 
Building human capital
Accelerating improvements in nutrition will make a huge difference to child learning outcomes and productivity, supporting the building of human capital. Tackling the high rates of child malnutrition will also contribute to the achievement of other SDGs by improving learning outcomes (SDG 4), boosting productivity to support a growing economy (SDG 8) and contributing to a healthy population (SDG 3). The evidence on the impact of stunting is clear; people who are malnourished as children do not reach their intellectual and physical potential1, have lower educational attainment2 and earn less as adults3. High levels of stunting are estimated to induce economic losses in Timor-Leste equivalent to 2 percent of GDP per year (World Bank, 2018b).  
The working age population is growing faster than the overall population, which presents great potential for a demographic dividend, if fertility rates continue to decline. Seizing a potential demographic dividend will require investment in quality education, skills, reproductive health education and the generation of decent jobs to create the right mix of demographic and social conditions to utilise the growing population. Creation of opportunities for young people will also  help sustain peace and development (SDG 16).
Promoting sustainable growth 
Timor-Leste is saving and managing the proceeds of its natural oil and gas resources for future generations through its Petroleum Fund. The nation strategically used withdrawals from the ‘sovereign wealth fund’ to frontload infrastructure, provide electricity, rehabilitate the devastated road network and improve access to schools and health facilities. As a small mountainous island state, developing efficient connective infrastructure to move people, goods and information is crucial for economic growth and strengthening social capital. The country is in a strong financial position in the short and medium term to invest in human capital and promote economic diversification, but the quality of public spending matters. A key lesson is ensuring that future withdrawals from the Petroleum fund achieves a return on investment and continues to be used to invest strategically in the drivers of growth – such as human capital and economic diversification. Economic diversification and job creation in productive sectors, such as agriculture, agribusiness for food processing, labour-intensive manufacturing and tourism will help create employment opportunities for citizens. It will help generate the skills and sustainable economic growth needed to accelerate progress on the SDGs.  
Leaving no one behind
Since independence, the Government of Timor-Leste adopted key legal instruments to promote inclusion, representation and the participation of women, youth and elderly. Cash transfers to veterans and vulnerable groups were prioritised early on by the Government to ensure social cohesion and continued peace. Continuing to resource and implement concrete policies and actions to support remote rural areas, persons and children with disabilities, informal workers and young mothers is vital to reach the furthest behind first. A greater effort is needed to mitigate disparities between municipalities and rural and urban areas, ensuring remote health services are fully equipped and investments in infrastructure also include construction, renovation, and maintenance of schools and classrooms.
Strengthening data collection and analysis 
While improvements in national statistical capacity have been made, producing and analysing high-quality, timely and reliable data for national reporting on SDGs can be difficult. Strengthening and resourcing capacity in statistics is crucial to produce relevant and accurate statistics that can provide evidence for national and municipal decision-making and policy. Improving collection and analysis of anthropometric data on child nutrition,  education quality and learning outcomes, and nationally representative data on water quality testing and sanitation will make strong contributions to monitoring progress in human development. Progress has been made to disaggregate data, however more investment is needed to ensure all survey data can be disaggregated by income, gender, age, migratory status, disability, social groupings and geographic location. In the spirit of leaving no one behind, it is important to know as much as possible about key vulnerable groups, to understand who has benefited from certain interventions, and who has not and to identify key problems. The disaggregation of data should not just apply to Census and DHS surveys, but also for all national surveys.
Learning from others and areas for support
Timor-Leste is keen to learn from other countries that have overcome some of the obstacles the nation is still grappling with. These include countries that have improved the capacity and reach of their justice sector and strengthened the quality of learning and teaching, while also dealing with the issues of multiple national languages. It also includes learning from other nations that have managed to combine the right mix of policies and interventions to reap a demographic dividend. Timor-Leste needs to generate significant number of decent jobs for a growing number of young men and women entering the workforce and would benefit from hearing about how other countries have generated employment in productive and service sectors. 
At this critical phase in its development, the country wants to make the most of partnerships and carefully leverage domestic and international resources to finance sustainable development. With low levels of public revenue, and overseas development assistance declining, new forms of financing, technology, south-south cooperation and technical support are required. In order to accelerate progress on sustainable development, Timor-Leste is keen to encourage the private sector as key partners in sustainable development to contribute towards financing the SDGs. Maximising support from bilateral and multilateral partners like the UN will be important for maintaining levels of finance to achieve the SDGs. Working closely with multilateral agencies will be crucial to support the transition from ‘least developed country’ to ‘middle income country’ status. 
Timor-Leste is interested to learn from the experience of other countries that have implemented new innovative financing mechanisms that can help unlock additional financing that will be required to progress the SDGs. Learning from countries that made the transition from least developed country status to middle income status, and how they managed to sustain sufficient levels of financing from development partners and the private sector would be useful. The resources, expertise and capacity needed to tackle important challenges, as well as maintain and accelerate progress are significant, and partnerships have a fundamental role to play. 


Timor-Leste championed the implementa-  Figure 2: Focus SDGs tion of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development from its inception and the country’s Strategic Development Plan (SDP) (2011-2030) is the primary vehicle for achieving the SDGs. In response to the 2030 Agenda, a Roadmap for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs was produced in 2017 outlining how the country’s national plan aligns with the SDGs. The SDP reflects Timor-Leste’s commitment to state-building, social inclusion and economic growth as it strives to become an upper middle-income nation by 2030. The plan outlines the systems, structures, and action that are needed by the Government, civil society, private sector and the international community to achieve the sustainable development goals.
Timor-Leste has aligned the VNR with the distinct phases of the nation’s Strategic Development Plan (SDP). The country’s Voluntary National Review adopts a targeted approach and focuses in-depth on the SDGs aligned with phase 1 of the nation’s development plan; the development of human resources, infrastructure and institutions. As a bridge to phase 2 of the SDP, which focuses on economic competitiveness, the review also assesses progress for SDG 8 Decent Work and Economic Growth. In addition, it evaluates progress for SDG 17, Partnerships for the Goals, as a cross-cutting issue aiding the implementation of the SDGs. Environmental and poverty reduction goals are outlined as long-term goals in the SDP. However, highlighting the interconnectedness of the SDG targets, progress towards the environmental and poverty reduction goals is already starting to take place underpinned by investments in infrastructure, economic development and social capital. Reflecting the country’s progress on reconciliation and democracy that has underpinned its progress on the other SDGs, SDG 16 Peace, Justice and Strong Institutions is the overarching theme of the report. SDG 16 was also reviewed indepth as a focus SDG. A statistical annex, outlining progress on the SDGs, is included at the end of this report.  


The objective of producing the Voluntary National Review (VNR) is to take stock of development progress and engage the country, and the broadest group of citizens, in discussions and debates about accelerating progress on sustainable development. The Voluntary National Review process has produced three main outputs: (i) the main report with a statistical annex, (ii) a 700-word synthesis of key messages and (iii) a 5-minute video. These will all be presented at the High-Level Political Forum in New York in July 2019.  
The process for developing the VNR involved 4 key stages
1. Phase 1: Reconvening the SDG working group and setting the direction and scope and focus of the report. This involved selecting focus SDGs and the overarching theme of the report.
2. Phase 2: Data collection: gathering data on the focus SDGs and preparing the statistical annex. 
3. Phase 3: Consultation process on the focus SDGs, key messages and communication process about the VNR and 2030 Agenda. 
4. Phase 4: Drafting and reviewing the messages and report and preparing the video. 
Phase 1: 
Reconvening the SDG working group and setting the scope 
Building an institutional structure to develop the VNR and to monitor progress
The process for developing the Voluntary National Review for Timor-Leste has been led by three core parts of the Government (see figure 3), with support from the United Nations. A VNR secretariat was established to manage the data collection, writing and consultation process for the report. The purpose of the secretariat was to ensure the production of the VNR was given the highest level of support by the Government. This secretariat was instrumental in re-convening the SDG working group in January 2019. The working group has played a key function in coordinating the VNR process. It will also continue to adopt an important role in monitoring progress on the SDGs following the finalisation of the Voluntary National Review.
 	 	  	       	       	Figure 3: Voluntary National Review Secretariat


The SDG working group consists of Government Ministries, Parliament, academia, private sector, media, religious organisations, and representatives of civil society (women’s NGO network, network of disabled people’s organisations and the National Youth Council) (see figure 4). It also includes development partners, including the United Nations, and additional civil society organisations as observers. It is a very important stakeholder mechanism, not only for helping shape and review the VNR report, but also for helping to strengthen the institutional structure for monitoring, communicating and accelerating progress on SDGs following this review. The SDG working group was crucial for facilitating political will and access to data from key ministries, but also for bringing together diverse stakeholders to discuss, debate and decide key aspects of the report.
 	Figure 4: Composition of SDG Working Group 


Setting the scope of the report
Overarching theme
Following consultation with the SDG working group, and approval by the Council of Ministers, SDG 16 was chosen as the overarching theme of the report. Goal 16 is the main goal for fostering peaceful, just and inclusive societies that are free from fear and violence. SDG 16 was selected as the principal theme of the report, as the country’s progress on SDG 16 has been a catalyst for development progress. It has created the conditions for sustainable development. As a member of the g7+ group of conflict-affected countries, Timor-Leste successfully advocated for the standalone goal on peace, justice and strong institutions. Selecting SDG 16 as the overarching theme does not mean that the country does not face challenges in relation to maintaining peace, securing justice and building strong institutions. However, by using SDG 16 as the lens for the report, it enables the country to take stock of progress on justice, security and institution-building and consider how this has shaped or hindered other improvements on sustainable development. 
SDG 16 was not designed to be isolated from other goals.  It has clear links with other goals in line with the integrated and indivisible nature of the 2030 agenda. Without peace, justice and inclusion, none of the SDGs can be delivered in full. Weak institutions and poor governance hold countries back from reaching their full development potential.  Violence and weak access to justice can lead to people and communities being left behind. However, economic and social development play an equally important role in promoting resilience and reducing risks. Supporting sustainable and inclusive development also creates the conditions for peaceful, just and inclusive societies. 
Inclusive economic growth and human development reduce the risks of violence and conflict. The 2030 Agenda recognises that there can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace without sustainable development.
Youth: Interlinkages between SDGs 	Figure 5: Youth and the demographic 
One of the key issues which connects SDG 16 to all the other SDGs is the political and economic inclusion of youth which necessitates taking advantage of key windows of opportunity to achieve the demographic dividend (see figure 5). Timor-Leste has one of the youngest populations in the world, with 39 percent below the age of 15 (Census 2015). The population below age 35 accounts for 74 percent of the total population (Census 2015). The working age population is growing faster than the overall population, which presents great potential for a demographic dividend if fertility rates continue to decline. Seizing a demographic dividend does not happen automatically and will require strong investments in skills and the creation of 
decent jobs. Supporting the inclusion of young men and women in education and the labour market and promoting gender equality will make a significant contribution to utilising the growing population and reaping the demographic dividend.  It will also help sustain peace and promote the social and economic inclusion of youth. This theme of the demographic dividend is explored throughout the report.

The data collection process involved working with the General Directorate of Statistics to review Government national surveys and meet with data focal points of Government ministries, secretariats and bodies to collect data obtained by ministry information systems. The process also involved assessing data gaps and identifying other sources of information and analysis. In addition, the data collection and analysis phase included meeting with civil society organisations, UN agencies and other development partners to review and analyse their data, reports and information on the SDGs. The consultation process with key stakeholders, outlined in the next phase, was also a crucial part of the data collection process, helping to analyse and contextualise the data.  The informal and formal consultation meetings played a useful role in helping to determine the key messages and interlinkages emerging from the data.
An assessment of data availability was also conducted for the focus SDGs. This revealed the level of data available for each indicator and highlighted areas where improvements in data collection were required.  It also indicated areas where additional data sources may be required. The data availability analysis will play an important role in helping to prioritise key areas for strengthening data collection in the future.  See section 6 for more information on the mapping of data availability and section 7 on the next steps in relation to data collection. 

Starting the conversation on the SDGs 
The objective of producing a VNR is to take stock of development progress and engage the country, and the broadest group of citizens, in discussions and debates about accelerating progress on sustainable development. The process of developing the report has enabled this conversation to start. It was not envisaged that this process would be completed in the few short months of writing the report. The implementation of the 2030 Agenda is an ongoing process, extending beyond submitting the review in July 2019 at the High-Level Political Forum until 2030 (see figure 6). While there is positive support for the SDGs from major community and business stakeholders in Timor-Leste, a study has concluded that most stakeholders only have vague notions of what the SDGs are, and what they entail. Only a limited number can articulate a clear vision for the SDGs, (Courvisanos and Jain, 2019) and very few stakeholders have well-defined criteria for evaluating success on the SDGs.
Taking into consideration this low level of understanding, with the support of the UN, the consultation process for producing this VNR report was designed. The aim of the consultation process was to set the scene for ongoing open discussions and feedback about the SDGs in Timor-Leste.  Due to the country’s unique context as a conflict-affected country, the priority was to use the VNR process as a platform to deepen awareness and discussion on sustainable development in Timor-Leste. The aim was to ensure space was provided to enable citizens at all levels, with different backgrounds, to give feedback on their experiences of sustainable development in the country. 
 	Figure 6: How the VNR fits into the longer-term process of dialogue on the SDGs

Building capacity on inclusive consultation processes
As the process of developing the VNR report is as important as the final report, considerable attention was given to engaging stakeholders in the different stage of developing the report. In particular, the focus was to hold targeted consultations with excluded groups and support their active involvement in the thematic and multi-stakeholder consultations. 
Box 1: Inclusive consultations: Creating a CSO advisory group
In addition to civil society being represented on the SDG Working Group, a CSO advisory group was established. The group was made up of the national NGO Platform, the National Youth Council, the network of women’s organisations, and a conflict-prevention NGO. The purpose of the group was to advise the VNR secretariat on how to effectively engage excluded groups in the consultation process. The advisory group supported the design of the consultations and assisted in the facilitation of the consultation meetings in Dili and Baucau (Timor-Leste’s second biggest city). The CSO advisory group advised on how to meaningfully engage with young women and men, children, persons with disabilities, excluded rural populations and the Regulatory Commission for Martial Arts (CRAM) in the consultation process. 
Key stakeholder groups for consultations
Although a wide group of stakeholders and individuals were consulted in the process of developing the VNR, key stakeholder groups were identified as target groups for consultation (see figure 7). Their inclusion in multi-stakeholder meetings was prioritised, as well as targeted, for smaller and individual meetings. 
Multi-stakeholder consultations were held in both Dili, the capital, and Baucau, the second biggest city. These consultations involved members of the private sector (Chamber of Commerce and Women’s Business Association), veterans, Government officials, CSOs, youth, women’s organisations, persons with disabilities, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and/or intersex (LGBTI) groups, among others (see Figure 7). 
 	Figure 7: Key stakeholder groups for consultation
Gender equality NGOs
	WOMEN	Feminist NGOs
Women business entrepreneurs
Youth Council and youth groups
	YOUTH	Youth political groupsMembers of LGBTI community 
University students and youth entrepreneurs
	PERSONS WITH 	Organisations of persons with disabilitiesChildren with disabilities
	DISABILITIES	Association of disabled people’s organisations in Timor-Leste
Conflict prevention and justice sector NGOs
	CIVIL SOCIETY 	Water and sanitation NGOs
	ORGANISATIONS	Education NGOs
LGBTI organisations
	GOVERNMENT 	Eminent Leaders and members of the opposition
	OFFICIALS AND 	Local Government Officials from Dili and Baucau MunicipalitiesPrime Minister and Council of Ministers
	POLITICAL LEADERS	Ministers and Director Generals
What did we consult on?
The process of developing the VNR has been highly consultative, from developing the scope of the report, and defining the parameters of the consultations, to refining the key messages and reviewing drafts of the report. As accelerating progress on the SDGs requires both technical expertise and political will, consultations on the political context and key messages were carried out with eminent leaders, members of the opposition and Government officials. The themes of the consultation meetings directly related to the focus SDGs and aimed to get the perspective of the target stakeholders on progress for these SDGs. As SDG 16 is the overarching theme, a dedicated thematic consultation was held on the topic of peace, justice and strong institutions in Timor-Leste.


Phase 4: Drafting and reviewing the report
The VNR process involved producing two main drafts that were presented to the VNR secretariat, SDG working group, civil society, Members of Government and the Council of Ministers for feedback. The first complete draft was translated into Tetun and Portuguese, the official languages of Timor-Leste, and was shared widely for consultation to be approved by the Council of Ministers. The process for drafting the report involved reviewing the data, the key messages emerging from the consultation process, and the information from key reports and interviews which helped contextualise, frame and analyse the data.



Linking the SDGs to the Strategic Development Plan  
Timor-Leste’s genuine ownership of the SDGs has been evident since the initial development of Agenda 2030 and the creation of the SDG working group in 2015. The Government of Timor-Leste adopted the 2030 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals through a Government resolution on 23 September 2015. This resolution also established a working group on SDG implementation to be chaired by the Prime Minister’s Office. Adoption of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs was subsequently ratified by a resolution of the National Parliament on 18 November 2015. This recommended that the Government of Timor-Leste align its planning and budget systems with the SDGs. The Government subsequently issued a directive formally establishing the SDG Working Group, and a decree in February 2016 mandating that the SDGs should be reflected in annual plans and budgets. 
The SDG Working Group assessed the alignment of Timor-Leste’s Strategic Development Plan 2011- 2030 with the new SDG goals and targets of the 2030 agenda. A Roadmap for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs was produced in 2017. It demonstrated how the 2030 Agenda could be harmonised with the SDP and how the ‘SDP is a vehicle to achieve the SDGs’. Critically, it outlined the systems, structures, and strategies that would be put in place by the Government to deliver the SDP and achieve the sustainable development goals. 
The Strategic Development Plan (2011-2030) covers three key areas: social capital, infrastructure development and economic development. It was developed through a highly consultative process throughout the country. It is designed to be delivered in three implementation phases; short, medium and long-term (see Figure 9). These are underpinned by institutional strengthening and supporting the development of macroeconomic foundations. These key interconnected areas support the three integrated dimensions of sustainable development and the 2030 agenda: namely economic, social, and environmental. 
 	Figure 9: Phases of the Strategic Development Plan (2011-2030) 

Phase 1 2011-2019Phase 2 2019-2025Phase 3 Until 2030Development of human resources: education, health, social inclusion, culture and heritageEliminate povertyInfrastructure development: water and sanitation, electricity, seaports, airports, telecommunications Strengthen private sector and cooperativesInstitution 
strengthening: Defence, security, foreign affairs, justice, public sector 
management and governanceExpand economic competitiveness: 
Agriculture and fisheries, petroleum, tourism, investment of private sectorDiversity and modernise the economySource: Timor-Leste’s Strategic Development Plan 2011-2030
From ashes to reconciliation, reconstruction and sustainable development
An important element of Timor-Leste’s approach to achieving the SDGs is to sequence and focus attention on priority SDG targets and indicators in line with the phases of the development plan. The focus SDGs in this 2019 Voluntary National Review directly align with phase 1 of the SDP (development of human resources, infrastructure and institutions) but also link to phase 2 on economic competitiveness. While economic growth and diversification are prioritised for phase 2 and phase of 3 of the SDP, the focus on infrastructure, institution-building and strengthening human capital all help create the foundations for economic growth. Addressing inequality, in order to promote inclusive development, is viewed as an integrated component of the Government’s approach to sustainable development that cuts across the different phases of the SDP. In the Voluntary National Review, addressing inequality and the promotion of inclusive development, is looked at through the lens of leaving no one behind which is explored in each chapter of the report.
The sequencing of SDG targets and priorities recognises the interrelationships between different goals and targets. Environmental and poverty reduction goals are outlined as long-term goals, underpinned by investments in infrastructure, economic development and social capital. Strengthening institutions, improving roads and water and sanitation, and increasing the health and education outcomes of Timorese citizens, are critical interlinked components for helping to reduce poverty. In addition, as a Small Island Developing State (SIDS), environment issues and climate change are important concerns for the country. The Government of Timor-Leste put in place the National Adaptation Plan of Action to address environmental sustainability and resilience in the early days since the restoration of independence.  Investing in climate-proof infrastructure and renewable energy are already starting to take place as the country moves toward the second phase of the SDP. This is in recognition of the interconnectedness of the pillars of sustainable development and the impact climate change will have on coastal communities and the progress made in phase 1 of the SDP. 
 	Figure 10: Strategic Development Plan and the SDGs 

Supporting implementation of the SDP and progress on SDGs:
• Institutions: The SDG working group includes representation from all Government ministries/ secretariats and bodies to ensure it remains relevant across political cycles and changes in Government. A key recommendation of this VNR is to elevate the working group to create a National Commission for the SDGs that would review progress against the goals and coordinate future VNRs in line with reviews of the Government programme. It will also play an important role in overseeing alignment of the Strategic Development Plan (SDP) with SDG indicators.
• Stakeholder engagement: The SDG working group enabled a wider range of stakeholders from civil society, private sector, academia, media, and the Parliament to engage formally in the process of creating and coordinating the VNR. The CSO advisory group was established to ensure that consultation process was inclusive as possible, within the timeframe, reflecting the leaving no one behind principle. Consultations were held with a variety of key stakeholders during the VNR development process. This process will continue after the report is submitted in New York.
• Policy processes: Since the adoption of the SDGs and Agenda 2030, Timor-Leste has made concerted efforts to align the SDP with the SDGs. The objective is to make policy making more integrated and the implementation of programmes better aligned with national targets. The Government has introduced several key initiatives to support the policy process. Medium-term planning and budgeting are underway to link sector plans and budgets to the SDP, to help with implementation and crucial costing of commitments in the SDP, and thereby the SDGs. 
• Budget processes: The budgetary governance roadmap supports the implementation of the SDP through linking the targets of the development plan to budget structures and budget funds for the annual budget cycle. In future all Government programmes will be aligned with the SDP, and thereby the SDGs. These budgetary reforms will enable quarterly and annual performance monitoring against the SDP and permit analysis of the alignment of Government programs to the SDGs. The reforms when completed will support the process of nationalising the SDG indicators and enable the monitoring and evaluation of SDG results from 2020 onwards.
• Monitoring and evaluation:  The establishment in 2015 of the Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation Unit (UPMA) in the Office of the Prime Minister has supported the Government to effectively integrate planning, budgeting and monitoring processes. UPMA is part of the Secretariat for the VNR and co-chairs the SDG working group. An independent evaluation of the implementation of the first phase of the Strategic Development Plan was conducted in 2016. This evaluation has helped to target and improve the implementation of the key pillars of the plan. Effective monitoring and evaluating is vital for tracking progress on the SDGs, ensuring policy coherence and aligning the SDGs with the SDP.
These processes are outlined in more detail in chapter 5 on Means of Implementation. 


Context
Following 500 years of Portuguese colonial rule and 24 years of Indonesian occupation, the nation restored independence on 20 May 2002 as the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste. The Timorese emerged from a bitter independence struggle and devastating period of conflict to vote in a unique referendum in 1999 that resulted in the restoration of independence. The United Nations transitional administration (UNTAET) was deployed to administer the Territory, exercise legislative and executive authority during the transition period and support capacity-building for self-Government. In 2002, as an independent country, Timor-Leste joined the UN and a new UN Mission was created (UNMISET). From 2002-2005, this mission provided support to the core administrative structures critical for the stability of new country. 
The Indonesian withdrawal and the militia uprising destroyed most of the country’s basic services, productive assets and institutions. The country’s infrastructure collapsed with the water supply, sewerage plants, electricity and communications devastated. Schools and health clinics were destroyed, with low levels of literacy and formal education existing among the general population. In the aftermath of the independence struggle, the newly formed Government responded to immediate needs while trying to maintain peace and stability. However, facing huge challenges to rebuild the country and create a Government from nothing, and without the capacity and resources needed to accelerate reconstruction, violence and instability flared up again in 2006. A new UN peacekeeping mission was established in 2006 and continued to support the new Government until 2012 when the UN mission ended. With the security gradually improving, the country invested in rebuilding infrastructure, targeting the health and basic education needs of its population and starting the long progress of building a Government and strengthening institutional capacity. Institutional frameworks and Government systems were out of date or non-existent, and complicated by language due to the previous governing regimes of Portugal, Indonesia and the UN administration. 

In 2013, the country began implementation of its Strategic Development Plan (SDP) 2011-2030 and accelerated on its path of development and state-building under the slogan ‘goodbye conflict and welcome development’. Since the period of violence and instability in 2006, the country has not experienced protracted violence, and is at peace. Despite political impasses that have occurred, the country has been able to overcome political and economic uncertainty without violence. However, in 2018 with the absence of a state budget and the functioning of public institutions under duodecimal regime, the political impasse slowed progress on the 2030 Agenda. Without access to regular petroleum resources, there was a reduction in Government spending and recurrent expenditure (World Bank, 2018b). This highlights the importance of SDG 16 for the development and economic growth of the nation. The factors that have led to the creation of peace and enabled Timor-Leste to start the process of state-building, outlined below, are important. They offer lessons to other countries emerging from conflict. In a short period of time, the progress made on peace, inclusion and state-building has created a good platform to increase progress on sustainable development. 
Box 2: Poverty at a glance
The country has experienced a significant decline in poverty, although the level of poverty is still quite high. The percentage of the population living below the national poverty line, has reduced from 50.4 percent in 2007 to 41.8 percent 2014 (Survey of Living Standards (SLS) 2014/15).  This means that there are fewer people in poverty, even accounting for population growth over this period. Using the internationally comparable poverty line of $1.90 per day, poverty in the country has reduced even more rapidly from 47 percent in 2007 to 30 percent in 2014 (World Bank World Development Indicators). This reduction in monetary poverty is reflected in ownership of certain consumer durables, which are other measures of living standards. Between 2007 and 2014, ownership of mobile phones increased by 56 percent, ownership of televisions by 23 percent, and ownership of motorcycles grew by 17 percent (SLS, 2014/15).  
Poverty remains largely a rural concern, with 80 percent of the poor living in rural areas (SLS, 2014/15).  However, the single largest cluster of poor people can be found in Dili, where around 15 percent of the poor live (80,000 people) (SLS, 2014/15). The incidence of poverty is also the highest among families with seven or more members and with a high number of dependents. 
Achievements 
20 years since the devastating struggle for the restoration of independence, Timor-Leste has emerged as a democratic and peaceful country with lessons to share with the world. As one of the youngest countries in the world, the progress the nation has made in building a democracy is considerable. Reconciliation and inclusion have underpinned stability and the creation of the democratic process. Since the referendum in 1999, Timor-Leste has undergone four democratic and peaceful elections. The maturing culture of democracy and respect for democratic competition is notable for a new country emerging from conflict. 
Timor-Leste recommits itself to showing leadership on SDG 16, working to promote peaceful, just and inclusive societies. Timor-Leste has demonstrated leadership of the g7+ community of conflict-affected nations and was a strong advocate for the inclusion of SDG 16 in the 2030 Development Agenda.  The g7+ have played an important role in amplifying the voice of fragile countries in Agenda 2030. Furthermore, as part of the New Deal framework, set up by the g7+, Timor-Leste is committed to new aid effectiveness principles for country-owned and country-led engagement in fragile situations. As the country consolidates this process of nation-building, strengthening institutions and promoting access to justice for all citizens will enable Timor-Leste to continue showing leadership on SDG 16.
Internal and regional reconciliation was a priority following the restoration of independence and helped unify the country. Deliberate action by political leaders to embrace reconciliation with Indonesia, created a culture of political inclusion. A Commission on Truth and Friendship between Indonesia and Timor-Leste was established by both Governments in 2005 to investigate acts of violence that took place during the referendum on regaining independence in 1999. This was the first modern bilateral truth commission to be established in the world. Interestingly, Indonesia is now Timor-Leste’s biggest trading partner. The Commission on Truth and Reconciliation (CAVR) also played an important role in helping people to heal, hearing over 8,000 witness statements and leading to the establishment of an Ombudsman. While some people consulted for this report, felt the recommendations of the final CHEGA report of the CAVR had not been fully implemented, it is recognised as an important step in reconciliation. The National Centre CHEGA, an autonomous agency, was established in 2017 in Timor-Leste to facilitate implementation of the recommendations of the CAVR and the Indonesia–Timor-Leste Commission of Truth and Friendship and promote human rights through education and training. This Centre is unique as it is an ongoing institution that continues the process of transitional justice after the completion of the Commission on Truth and Reconciliation. The CHEGA Centre continues to follow up recommendations from both commissions and facilitating dialogue on their findings.
The importance of the social and economic inclusion of veterans was grasped early on, and the provision of social security payments, helped to maintain peace. The Government of Timor-Leste adopted key legal instruments after regaining independence to promote inclusion and representation of vulnerable groups. Social transfers to veterans, the elderly, persons with disabilities and poor families were prioritised by the Government to ensure social cohesion and continued peace. A lesson that is emerging is the importance of ensuring continued coverage and targeting of social transfers to the most vulnerable but also identifying additional interventions to reduce social and economic exclusion. Communities in remote rural areas, people and children with disabilities, and young women continue to face challenges accessing education, quality health care and decent jobs. While inequality within Timor-Leste is low by international standards, with a gini-coefficient in 2014 of 0.29, it has increased marginally, from a gini-coefficient of 0.28 in 2007 (World Bank, 2018a). Ensuring community and Government efforts are sustained to reach the furthest behind first is critically important for achieving the SDGs.
Timor-Leste is consolidating its culture of democracy and media freedom that respects political rights and competition. The constitution provides for the freedoms of peaceful assembly and association and freedom of expression including for the press. 
Crucially, these rights are respected and celebrated in the country. Timor-Leste’s status in Freedom House’s index improved from Partly Free to Free and its political rights rating improved from 3 to 2. This was due to a smooth transfer of power that enabled new parties and candidates to enter the political system (Freedom House 2018). The independent National Elections Commission (Comissão Nacional Eleições, CNE) ensures that political candidates can campaign freely, and citizens can exercise their right to vote. Significantly, civil education is promoted by another autonomous agency, the Technical Secretariat for Electoral Administration. 
Box 3: Youth engaging in political life 
In Timor-Leste, the voting age is 17, indicating that the country fully grasps the potential of young people. Electoral turnout has been impressive, with 76 percent and 81 percent of registered voters participating in the 2017 Parliamentary Elections and the 2018 Early Parliamentary Elections respectively (CNE, 2017 and 2018). The 2018 Parliamentary elections represented the highest turnout since the restoration of independence in 2002 (CNE, 2018).  Considering that in both elections, 51 percent of registered voters were between the age 17 and 30, it is evident that young people are at the forefront of the democratic process (CNE, 2017 and 2018). The number of registered voters increased by 20 percent from 626,503 in 2012 to 748,286 in 2017 and 2018 (CNE, 2017 and 2018). The nation’s two Electoral Management Bodies, supported by the UN and other partners, made concerted efforts to encourage youth to take part in the electoral process. While there is no age-disaggregated data to assess the actual turnout of young voters on election day, the fact that many youth (females and males) are registered, indicates that they are interested in engaging in political life. In 2016, the National Youth Council established a forum for youth political parties. This forum aims to support the parties to gather young leaders from each political party before the elections to sign the National Unity Pact. They also organised public television debates between young political leaders and conducted a roadshow with youth political parties on the topic of peace, inclusion and reconciliation. 
Source:  Timor-Leste SDG 16+ Case study on Youth 2019: produced by the Secretariat of State for Youth and Sport, Belun and HATUTAN with the United Nations Timor-Leste
Since the referendum in 1999, the country has had four democratic and peaceful elections, with an important decline in violence in each Parliamentary election since 2007 (Belun, 2017a). The peaceful elections were a large part due to a combination of national and local initiatives to prevent conflict around elections. In several municipalities, political party leaders sign peace or unity pacts to uphold peace and security in the municipality before, during and after the presidential and parliamentary elections. Local Suco (village) chiefs organise activities to collect weapons in the community before the elections to prevent violence. The National Directorate for Community Conflict Prevention also runs forums for all political parties to dialogue before the elections and prevent violence.  
Timor-Leste is at peace and is continuing to maintain this peace despite bouts of political tension and impasses that have surfaced in recent years. The country has not only emerged from the post-conflict phase but has been able to keep peace and prevent flare-ups. The last homicide rate calculated by UNODC in 2015 was low, with 5.1 for 100,000 inhabitants (WHO, 2018) which is well below the world average, illustrating the relative safety of the country. After the crisis of 2006, the Government understood the importance of crisis prevention and established the National Directorate for Community Conflict Prevention under the Secretariat of State for Security. Through an innovative partnership with the NGO Belun and other ministries, local Government and civil society, the Conflict Prevention and Response Network has been able to identify early on risks of conflict across the country and diffuse tensions (see box). The Government also established the Department of Peacebuilding and Social Cohesion in 2010 under the Ministry of Social Solidarity. The Directorate worked closely with UNDP to institutionalise conflict resolution mechanisms and procedures. 
Box 4: Innovative approaches to conflict prevention
An innovative early warning system run by the Timorese NGO Belun, in partnership with the National Directorate for Community Conflict Prevention, Government ministries, local Government and civil society, is making a positive contribution to conflict prevention. Each month, NGO Belun runs an early warning system that provides data to the Network on 66 different economic, external, political and social indicators of conflict potential. They also produce a Timor-Leste Annual Conflict Potential Analysis report. For instance, in September 2018, the early warning system documented a significant increase in acts of violence against women and girls (Belun, 2018a). Once rising tensions are identified – which are commonly related to land disputes, conflicts between young people, domestic violence and interactions between communities and the police and the military – the Directorate circulates the information to the Council of Ministers, which determines which Ministry is in the best position to address the issue. 
Security and political inclusion have been underpinned by reforms and increased professionalisation in the army and police. After the 2006 crisis, Security Sector Reform was undertaken. The strengthening of the security forces enabled the country to overcome the recent political impasse and maintain peace and stability. The police reform strategy, including the introduction of Suco (village) officers and community policing approaches, has proven to be very effective in promoting security and improving the performance of police. Community policing approaches have shown that crime in Timor-Leste can be greatly reduced by building trust and fostering more effective partnerships, cooperation and problem-solving between the community and the police (The Asia Foundation, 2016a). Despite the success of these initiatives, it is important that the community-oriented policing approach is adopted by the wider police force (PNTL) and moves beyond community police units. The National Human Rights Institution and the UN, in close collaboration with the national police and the army, have been implementing a standardised programme of human rights training for both forces, since 2014 for the police, and since 2018 for the army, contributing to the professionalisation of the army. One decade after the crisis, the legitimacy of the army and the police has increased within the Timorese population (Belun, 2017b). 
Timor-Leste has made massive strides in complying with its commitment to international human rights instruments and reporting. One of the country’s earliest commitments was to establish a national human rights institution, the Provedoria dos Direitos Humanos e Justiça (PDHJ) in 2005. It has the power to investigate and monitor human rights abuses and governance standards as well as make recommendations, including for prosecution, to relevant authorities. It has been accredited with A-Status as it is established in line with the Paris Principles. Timor-Leste has ratified seven of the nine core human rights conventions and has committed to ongoing Universal Periodic Reviews (UPR), and treaty reporting, while civil society and the PDHJ also submit their reports. Civil society, PDHJ, the UN and donors are also working with the Government to ensure the ratification of the Convention on the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in the near future.
Birth registration rates are increasing but remain low, which is often a problem in conflict-affected countries (DHS, 2016). While 60.4 percent of children under 5 years of age have their birth registered, only 29.2% percent of children have a birth certificate (Census 2015), highlighting careful analysis of the key bottlenecks around birth registration is required. Interestingly fewer children in urban areas are registered (51.7 percent), compared to 63.9 percent of children under the age of 5 in rural areas (Census, 2015). While there is no legal requirement in Timor-Leste to produce a birth certificate for school enrolment, they are normally required for taking examinations and enrolling in university. Birth registration has been identified by the Government as a priority in reducing discrimination, trafficking, statelessness and sexual exploitation. The right to identity is an important human right and is enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). For children it is also very important in preventing child marriage by providing proof of age. 
Timorese feel increasingly confident that they can influence the Government. Data on citizen satisfaction with public services or citizen perception of responsive decision-making is not available at the national level, but NGOs have made significant progress on national perception surveys to help fill the gap. According to a public opinion survey by The Asia Foundation (2018b), in August 2018, nearly 90 percent (88.8 percent) of people either “strongly agreed” or “agreed” that they can provide feedback to the Government so that they can take into account the views of the people. This represents a 23 percent increase since 2013 when 67 percent held the same view (The Asia Foundation, 2016b).
There are several innovative initiatives that are ongoing which aim to improve the transparency and effectiveness of public administration and the civil service. The transparency portal is a publicly accessible online tool that is part of the Government’s transparency initiative and commitment to aid effectiveness. In addition to providing data on committed and disbursed aid funds it also provides access to Government financial and performance data. Public administration reform is an ongoing process, which through strengthening the Civil Service Commission aims to enhance merit-based recruitment and performance assessment. While there is still a lot more work to do in terms of institutional strengthening, these reforms are important steps.
The gradual decentralisation of planning and budgeting to municipal level is starting to contribute to the modernisation of public administration. Strengthening public institutions at municipal level is critical for achieving the SDGs. However, it will take time for education and health systems at municipal level, for example, to build their capacity and fulfil their newly decentralised responsibilities. Decentralisation of public services has the potential to improve accountability and responsiveness of local service providers and create greater opportunities for women and youth to be involved in decision-making processes. Further work is needed for the sustainable development goals to be mainstreamed into municipal development plans and budgets and to strengthen the public financial management and financial capacities at municipal level. Decentralisation can play an important role in tackling disparities between municipalities and ensuring no one is left behind.
Challenges
Institutional capacity and weak human resources remain  key obstacles in building accountable, transparent and effective institutions. At the restoration of independence, Government facilities were non-existent, devastated or severely run-down. There were also severe shortages of human capital. The general level of formal education of the population was very low, few Timorese had Government experience or possessed adequate skills for professional work or business. Timor-Leste’s institutional frameworks were exceptionally weak. While the Government has invested heavily in rebuilding public services and institutions, the process of developing capable and accountable institutions takes a long time. Significant progress has been made to strengthen human rights, anti-corruption and electoral institutions. This puts the country in good stead to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of the public administration and civil services and the accountability of service delivery. However, the challenge ahead is significant and will require continual and sustained support and investment. 
24.4 percent of women (aged 15-49) have experienced sexual violence by age 18 (The Asia Foundation, 2016c), 31 percent in the past 12 months, demonstrating that while the country is at peace, violence against women is an issue the country is still grappling with. Consolidating peace also requires ensuring that all citizens, including young girls, feel safe and secure in their lives, and are free from violence. There are a growing amount of research and programme and interventions on the issue of domestic violence and corporal punishment in Timor-Leste, which is a positive step in helping to guide implementation of the National Action Plan on Gender-Based Violence (2017 to 2021). The National Action Plan has been integrated into the annual action plans of Government institutions, resulting in committed budget allocations by the Government of Timor-Leste to address gender-based violence. This important issue is addressed further in the chapter on SDG 5.
Children at school have self-reported a high level of violence, indicating that violence in childhood is also a concern outside the home environment. A study conducted by UNICEF (2016) with the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports (MEJD) and the Commission for the Rights of the Child in Timor-Leste showed that in relation to physical violence by a teacher at school, 75 percent of boys and 67 percent of girls reported that in the last 12 months they had experienced being hit (with hand or object), slapped, kicked, pinched, or pulled by a teacher. Education guidance and stricter regulations on corporal punishment in schools have been circulated, and put into place, being the first small step in promoting a culture of zero tolerance. However, more needs to be done to ensure child protection policies and laws are adopted and implemented to prohibit all forms of violence against children particularly girls and children with special needs in all settings, including in the home.
Maintaining peace is bigger than the absence of conflict, and for young people this relates to securing their futures with decent work. Talking to young men and women consulted for this report revealed that for many young people their understanding of peace and justice relates to creating jobs and opportunities for young people, reducing gender-based violence and controlling violence related to Martial Arts Groups. Young people consulted for this report felt peace in the broader sense was still lacking in Timor-Leste. They felt strongly that peace and justice should be seen in relation to other SDGs, such as decent work, health and education. While violence relating to Martial Arts Groups was a key concern, young men and women felt it was directly related to the lack of opportunities for youth. The view expressed by young people was that sustaining peace in Timor-Leste would require the promotion of the economic, political and social inclusion of young men and women. 
Box 5: Youth parliaments: The role of youth in sustaining peace 
Civil society, youth groups and the Government are keenly aware of the unique opportunities and threats that youth can play in both sustaining and threatening existing peace. As early as 2009, the country established a Youth Parliament, composed of young Timorese between 12 and 17 years old, who represent their peers from their municipalities in national debates on key issues and make recommendations to the National Parliament and the Government. In addition, each political party has a youth wing enshrined in party statutes. Recognising the importance of the youth parliament in promoting leadership, the budget for the Youth Parliament originates from the National budget. In 2016, Timor-Leste adopted its first National Youth Policy following extensive consultations with youth. It prioritises education, health, employment, civic participation, and freedom from violence and crime. Ensuring the priorities outlined in the policy are implemented will be key to maintain the progress on SDG 16. 
Securing improvements in the justice sector is important for maintaining and achieving progress on all SDGs. Like many countries emerging from conflict, the country is still grappling with how to strengthen the justice sector. The importance of ensuring access for all vulnerable citizens and addressing capacity gaps within the sector was identified as a key priority in all the consultations organised to feed into this VNR report. The justice sector plays an integral role in consolidating peace and stability in Timor-Leste, guaranteeing the rule of law and promoting accountability and transparency. It is also a key building block in enhancing investor confidence needed to grow the private sector. 
One of the most critical gaps in the Timorese justice system is the lack of well-trained lawyers and judges. There are not enough legal professionals to handle the number of cases that arise. In 2002, the entire formal justice system consisted of twenty-two trainee judges, nine trainee prosecutors, and nine public defenders (USAID, The Asia Foundation, Stanford Law School, 2013). While the situation has improved since then, the continued lack of sufficient legal professionals, causes delays in hearing and adjudicating cases, leading to overcrowding of prisons. According to the Ministry of Justice, unsentenced detainees (prisoners awaiting trial) make up 21 percent of the overall prison population (Ministry of Justice admin data, 2018). In 2017 the course at the Legal and Judicial Training Centre was re-established to train judges, prosecutors, public defenders to respond to the shortage of human resources in the courts. The course is also open to private lawyers, notaries, legal activists and legal trainers who provide training to human rights activists and academics at Universities.  Furthermore, language barriers and lack of interpreters trained in juridical terms also causes challenges for communities, as legal proceedings use Portuguese, a language in which a significant amount of people are not yet literate (JMSP 2017). 
Access to justice continues to be a pervasive issue for victims and survivors of gender-based violence. Resources within the police and judiciary systems that are allocated to gender-based violence cases are often very limited. Furthermore, the majority of victims face a long journey from their community to the nearest court, creating further difficulties in accessing judicial support. The co-existence of a customary justice system and a formal justice system is another challenge for victims trying to access justice. Language barriers and low literacy rates among women also create difficulties for victims in understanding the legal process of the formal justice system. Notwithstanding these barriers, progress has been made in resolving cases of gender-based violence though the formal justice system. 
Box 6: Overcoming challenges: innovation in monitoring the justice sector
Judicial System Monitoring Program (JSMP) was established on 28 April 2001 with the objective to monitor the trial process in the Indonesian Ad Hoc Tribunal for human rights violations, and the Special Panel for Serious Crimes in Timor-Leste. 18 years later JSMP provides comprehensive monitoring of the justice system in the country. It closely monitors cases, provides statistics on cases and funding in the justice sector and engages in advocacy about strengthening transparency, accountability and the rule of law in Timor-Leste.
The justice sector lacks sufficient capacity in terms of reaching remote areas outside the capital Dili. Mobile courts have proved to be an innovative way to improve the reach of the justice system in areas where there are no permanent courts. The mobile courts are highly valued and have resulted in a significant reduction in pending criminal cases (UPR, 2016). However, their reach is still limited, covering only nine  out of thirteen municipalities. Civil cases are also not tried by the mobile courts and women largely continue to use the traditional rather than the formal justice system. The Government is keen to expand courts in all municipalities and build more facilities to conduct trials, but recognises more resources are needed. 
Timor-Leste’s customary practices play an important role in resolving disputes between individuals and communities, such as land disputes, but further efforts are needed to harmonise formal and customary justice systems. The country’s customary practices have received international recognition (UN Special Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, 2019) for their role in resolving disputes and promoting community cohesion. Timor-Leste supported the adoption of the Declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples in the United Nations General Assembly in 2007 and the Constitution recognises and values customary law and heritage. However, the Constitution of Timor-Leste does not give guidance on how such customs should be recognised and addressed in practice. The land and property law (2017) regulates land ownership and guarantees that traditional practices are non-discriminatory and ensure gender equality. However, 90 percent of the land in Timor-Leste is governed by customary land tenure systems (UN Rapporteur on the rights of indigenous peoples, 2019) and most are not formally registered. It is not always clear how the land and property law operates in practice alongside customary law, opening the door for conflicts over registration to occur. In recognition of these, the Government is conducting a participatory consultation process on how to harmonise formal and customary justice systems to ensure greater access to justice.
The creation of the Anti-Corruption Commission was an important step in tackling corruption and promoting the independence of the judiciary, however, the level of corruption is still high. 44 percent of businesses in Dili have reported that they paid a bribe to a public official or were asked for a bribe by those public officials during the previous 12 months (World Bank Enterprise Survey, 2017). While corruption was not seen as one of the most pressing issues in the country in a recent public opinion survey, (only 3 percent reported it as the most important issue), 37 percent indicated it was a serious issue (International Republican Institute 2018). Ensuring that justice is applied equally to all citizens was a key issue emerging from the consultation on SDG 16 for this report. The Anti-Corruption Commission (KAK) is independent and has significant powers, illustrating that it has the potential to fully address the issue. The Anti-Corruption Commission has made significant progress, initiating training sessions for investigators on anti-corruption and financial investigations and conducting public awareness programmes on corruption. There has been an increase in the number of cases investigated and brought to the courts, leading to a steady rise in convictions. The Justice Sector Strategic Plan outlines the commitment to strengthen the inspection bodies, in particular, the Office of the Inspector General of the State. It is important to ensure this commitment is followed through. Renewed Government investment in justice reform, potentially matched with increased international assistance to bring in additional capacity and international comparators, would help realise progress in all other SDGs.  
Data availability
The availability of data for SDG 16 indicators is low, with data available for only 24 percent of indicators. SDG 16 was not covered by the MDGs 24% and is a new area that many countries struggle to collect data.  For example, in order to meet the data requirements for indicators 16.3.1 on victims of violence and 16.5.1 bribery, a dedicated crime survey would 
be required, which would be a significant investment. There is also currently no official data on Human Trafficking. The global alliance for reporting progress on SDG 16 is an important initiative that attempts to help improve data access and quality and to support countries to make sense of quantitative and qualitative data. A future recommendation could be to engage further with this alliance to strengthen access to data on peace, justice and strong institutions.  
As part of the Government’s effort to achieve universal birth registration by 2021, the Government, with support from development partners, conducted a baseline assessment of birth registration data in order to improve understanding of the situation through disaggregated data. Analysis of this data makes an important contribution to improving understanding of the disparities at municipal level and how this links to other forms of deprivation. In relation to social cohesion, the University of Timor-Leste is part of a UNICEF-supported international research network tasked to design a measurement framework to capture the contributions of early childhood development (ECD) interventions in making societies more cohesive, peaceful and inclusive, contributing to the achievement of SDG16. Information on this will help generate data on SDG16 for Timor-Leste.
Achievements 
The percentage of children under 5 years old suffering from stunting has started to decrease from 58 percent in 2009/2010 to 46 percent in 2016 (DHS)4. However, this rate is still very high. In addition, the prevalence of both stunting (height for age) and wasting (weight for height) is considered ‘very high’ according to WHO public health classifications (WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition). Timor-Leste is committed to further reduce the high incidence of child stunting, which is the result of chronic malnutrition. The Government of Timor-Leste recognises that to maintain this progress and further reducing stunting, concerted action and leadership at different levels will be required (within families and communities; with support from development partners, Parliamentarians, civil society and the private sector). Crucially, it requires multi-sectoral action involving health, education, water, sanitation and hygiene, gender equality, agriculture and fisheries, strong public engagement and positive parental care practices. Tackling malnutrition will make a huge difference to learning outcomes and productivity needed to support a growing economy and a healthy population. The evidence on the impact of stunting is clear; people who are malnourished as children do not reach their intellectual and physical potential5, have lower educational attainment6 and earn less as adults.7 High levels of stunting in Timor-Leste are estimated to induce economic losses equivalent to 2 percent of GDP per year (World Bank, 2018b).  
Notable improvements in breastfeeding rates, a critical component of dietary intake and nutrition among infants, were made between 2003 and 2016. This illustrates that there is political will and support from the community to adopt good practice infant feeding behaviours. Breastfeeding is recognised as a priority in Timor-Leste’s national nutrition plans and policies, as part of supporting appropriate maternal infant and young child nutrition practices including complementary feeding and micronutrient supplementation. However, despite these improvements, the progress has not been maintained. The percentage of infants who were breastfed in the first hour after birth rose from 47 percent in 2003 to 82 percent in 2009/108 and 93.4 percent in 20139; before falling to 75 percent in 201610. Similarly, the proportion of children aged 0-5 months who were exclusively breast-    Figure 11: Breastfeeding rates fed rose from 30.7 percent in 2003 to 62.3 percent in 2013, before falling to 50 percent11 in 2016 (see figure 11). 
While the dietary intake of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) is mostly improving (FAO/EU/CONSSAN-TL 2019), the prevalence of undernutrition in women of reproductive age (15-49 years) is very high at 27 percent, while anaemia is also on the rise (DHS 2016) (see figure 12). Improving the diets of women of reproductive age will disrupt the vicious cycle 
of a stunted adolescent and malnourished woman going on to have her own low-birth weight baby. Reducing teenage pregnancy and providing access to sexual and reproductive health for the population will also make a contribution to reducing malnutrition. Breaking the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition is a fundamental way of getting on top of stunting in Timor-Leste. The Government has prioritised adolescent girls, pregnant women and lactating women as targets and change agents for the Zero Hunger National Action Plan. In particular, supporting school-going adolescent girls to understand the importance of foetal, infant and young child growth is a key youth-focused activity of the Zero Hunger Plan. To support this, the MEJD has ensured that components on food and nutrition issues for all age groups are integral parts of all levels of the curriculum. Currently these issues are already an important part of the primary level curriculum, and the Ministry is planning to develop pre-secondary and  secondary school curriculuma which will further build upon these concepts and continue to promote concrete actions and results in this area. 
Box 7: Nutrition-promoting behaviours: a snapshot of one Suco (village) 
A qualitative study (a)12 designed to understand the behavioural determinants of exclusive breastfeeding, complementary feeding, continued breastfeeding and related WASH behaviours for children aged 0-23 months was conducted in 2018 in Holarua Suco (village), Manufahi. One of key findings related to dietary diversity and confusion over which nutritious complementary foods are appropriate for children aged 6-23 months. The study also found while there was strong appreciation of the benefits of breastfeeding, there was confusion in relation to correct practices. The study a found that while most households have their own toilet, children’s defecation practices represent a greater health risk than that of adults. Knowledge around hand washing with soap was found to be good, but practice was low.
A complementary quantitative baseline study (b)13 in the same Suco found that while 70.4 percent of mothers/caregivers knew to breastfeed immediately after birth, only 59.9 percent of children were breastfed immediately (or within one hour) after birth and only 79.4 percent were exclusively breastfed in the first three days after birth. The study also found that many were not very familiar with early signs of hunger. Only 27.4 percent identified restlessness as an early sign of hunger and only 19.6 percent thought that children should be breastfed on demand. Although 86.1 percent thought children should be exclusively breastfed for six months or more, 28.1 percent believed that a breastfed child should be given liquids other than breast milk before s/he is 6 months old. Most respondents (86.1 percent) knew that a child 6 months of age and older should be fed a diverse diet and 81.4 percent agreed with the importance of feeding children under 2 years old a diverse diet. However, only 9.9 percent of children 6 to 23 months old consumed the minimum dietary diversity. 
Timor-Leste was the first coun-	Figure 12: Trends in anaemia among women and children 
try in the region to sign up for a Zero Hunger National Action Childrenordination. The 2017 National Food and Nutrition Security Policy and the 2015-2025 Zero Hunger Action Women24%Plan and important progress has 
been made on multi-sectoral co-40%
Plan provide the key frameworks for addressing stunting. The Zero Hunger National Action is a com-
prehensive multi-sectoral plan tar- DHS 2009/10 DHS 2016 geting equitable access to food year-round for everyone and re-
ducing stunting to zero by 2025.  Strengthening the role of the cross-ministerial governance mechanism, CONSSAN-TL, has been an important feature of the national response to food security and malnutrition. Recognising the link between education and nutrition, the National School Feeding Programme plays an important role in keeping children at school and reducing hunger. Policy makers in Timor-Leste recognise that the causes of malnutrition are interconnected and are in the process of developing a new clear evidence-based action plan outlining the most impactful interventions from six key sectors for nutrition.  Due to the complex drivers of malnutrition, policy coherence is a key component in delivering a comprehensive response to stunting.  Strengthening the legal basis of CONSSAN-TL and developing a multi-sector results framework and a nutrition tag to track public expenditure will also be key in monitoring progress.   
Among the most prevalent issues in Timor-Leste is the issue of food insecurity. Malnutrition, food insecurity and poverty are intricately and multi-directionally linked: each contributes to the presence and permanence of others (EU/FAO/ CONSSAN-TL, 2019). But for the first time ever, due to the first integrated phase classification analysis of chronic food insecurity, it is possible to obtain a realistic picture of food insecurity in Timor-Leste. This has the potential to make a considerable impact on targeting food security interventions.  One third of the population, 36 percent, suffers chronic food insecurity, including 21 percent who experience moderate chronic food insecurity and 15 percent that experience severe food insecurity (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, 2019a).  On average, households in Timor-Leste spend almost 70 percent of their income on food (see figure 13), with poorer families spending even a larger component of their income on food. Improving agricultural productivity and food security can make an important contribution to addressing malnutrition. Agriculture productivity remains substantially lower in Timor-Leste compared to neighbouring countries with similar agro-economies (World Bank, 2019a). Given the low productivity level, there are substantial opportunities to increase agriculture outputs at low investment cost.
The Government recognises Figure 13: Household expenditure by type of expenditure (%), 2011 the importance of food security and food-based solutions (food availability, access, utilisation and stability) as a driver of nutrition. The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries has made agricultural production and productivity a priority in its 2014-2020 Strategic Plan, in order to increase the availability and adoption of nutrient-rich foods. Access to nutritious food and im-
provements in dietary habits Source: Timor-Leste Household Income and Expenditure Survey 2011 will make an important contribution to tackling malnutrition in infants, children and women of reproductive age. Increasing agricultural extension services (with officers trained on nutrition sensitive agriculture) will significantly help promote access to improved (high yield) staple crop seed and diversification, leading towards high nutritional value crops for farming households. Research in Timor-Leste has demonstrated that farmers growing the improved high yield varieties are generally more food secure than those who continue traditional or local varieties. (Spyckerelle, et al. 2016).
Box 8: Engaging Youth: vital for food security and nutrition 
Youth are a key stakeholder in efforts to improve nutrition. Providing training on nutrition and food security to youth and engaging them in dialogue on these issues is an important component not only in breaking the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition, but also in strengthening future leadership on the issue. There is a need for greater support and recognition of women and youth in agricultural production (EU/FAO/CONSSAN-TL, 2019). Only 10 percent of farmers are under the age of 30 (IDADE, 2017) and 21 percent of young women between the ages of 15-24 are farmers (Belun, 2018b). The MEJD and Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries are planning to significantly reform agricultural secondary schools and develop a nutrition-sensitive curriculum, so that they teach young farmers the skills needed for rural livelihoods and to support nutrition.  Building the capacity of rural youth to add value to agricultural production and establish income-generation activities in agriculture that support food security are important to support the new generation of farmers. Encouraging women and youth, in particular, to engage in small livestock production for self –consumption and income will help increase the consumption of animal source foods in support of healthy diets (EU/FAO/ CONSSAN-TL, 2019).
Challenges
Reducing rates of diarrhoea, a key driv- Figure 14: Prevalence of stunting in er of malnutrition, through improved   children aged 6-59 months, 2016 (%) water, sanitation and hygiene, is a challenge that communities and the Government are still grappling with. Analysis conducted by the World Bank (2018a) indicates that the strongest factors associated with stunting are poor water and sanitation and lack of access to health facilities. In 2016, 11 percent of children aged 0-59 months had diarrhoea in the last two weeks, 14.6 percent in urban areas and 9.1 percent in rural areas (DHS, 2016). In relation to hand-washing, which is crucial for hygiene and preventing the spread of disease, interviewers for the DHS only observed the presence of soap and water in 28 percent of the households where a place for hand-washing was observed (DHS, 2016). The persistently high prevalence of diarrhoea indicates the disease burden driving malnutrition in Timor-Leste. Children under 5 years who had experienced diarrhoea, fever or fever 
with cough in the last two weeks were significantly more likely to be stunted than those who had not (FNS,2013). Furthermore, children in households with treated drinking water are also found to be 10 percent less likely to be stunted, and 4 percent less likely where there was a flush toilet (World Bank, 2018a).  In order to address the high prevalence of diarrhoea and respiratory illnesses and their contribution to malnutrition, the National Health Sector Strategic Plan (2011-2030) targets diarrhoea and pneumonia as priorities in the Control of Communicable Diseases strategy. The Ministry of Health has also set a national target of having the entire country certified open defecation free by 2020.
Sufficient financing and support to building technical capacity are required to enable key institutions to sustain progress on reducing stunting. In recognition of the significant capacity challenges facing the country in tackling malnutrition, both the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries include strengthening the capacity of the nutrition workforce as a priority. The Ministry of Health, with support from UNICEF and the EU, also invested in creating new positions at national and municipal level. This is to ensure that Municipal Public Health officers in nutrition and Nutrition Coordinators are based in every community health centre in every Administrative Post.  A strategic review of SDG2 conducted in 2017 (CEPAD and Johns Hopkins University, 2017) found that human resource capacity and “efforts to alleviate food insecurity and malnutrition in all its forms are hampered by a shortage, not just in sheer numbers, but also in the skills, leadership, and institutional capacity of the nutrition workforce”.



The cost of implementing the activities of Zero Hunger Plan at scale is estimated at US$1.7 billion over 10 years, while a Government review found that the funding required for the full implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy (2015-2019) in 2017 was US$9.5m of which almost US$6m was unfunded (Provo A.M., et al. 2015). A considerable proportion of nutrition expenditures have come from donors, particularly the EU-funded Integrated Nutrition Programme.  However, due to the multi-faceted nature of malnutrition and food insecurity it is very difficult to determine how much funding these sectors receive. In total, the Ministry of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries combined accounted for just 4.4 percent of the 2017 national budget, while nutrition services accounted for just 1 percent of the total 2017 Health Budget (Budget Transparency Portal). The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries ratio of the state budget has reduced over time, from 3.9 percent in 2008 to 1.1 percent in 2016 (World Bank, 2019a). The 2017 SDG 2 review (CEPAD and Johns Hopkins University, 2017) on Timor-Leste’s progress and success in achieving SDG2 recommended that Timor-Leste increase national investments toward nutrition and agriculture programming to a minimum of 5 percent of GDP. There are a large number of nutrition and food security stakeholders in Timor-Leste, including Government ministries, NGOs, UN agencies and bilateral agencies. According to the EU/ FAO/ CONSSAN-TL (2019) study, the lack of effective coordination of and cooperation between these stakeholders is partially responsible for slow progress on SDG2.
Leaving no one behind
Wide disparity in levels of stunting between municipalities exists, highlighting further work needs to be done to narrow the gap and leave no one behind.  While in Ainaro, 59 percent of children suffer from chronic malnutrition or stunting, in Manufahi the level is much lower at 38 percent. Dili, however, has a relatively high rate of 43 percent (DHS, 2016).  However, the situation of stunting is complex, and not necessarily driven solely by poverty. While higher levels of malnutrition are evident among poorer households, richer households with less food access problems, also experience relatively high levels of malnutrition. In 2016, 36 percent of children in households from highest income quintile were stunted, which is very high (DHS, 2016). While the stunting rate has started to fall since 2009/2010, it has fallen very little in rural areas (DHS 2010 and DHS 2016), indicating a rural-urban gap may be starting to emerge and should be monitored. Children living in rural areas are still among the most malnourished in the world. 
Gender inequality is an important underlying cause of malnutrition in Timor-Leste. While women (and young women) play a critical role in nutrition and food security, they are not fully empowered as decision makers (EU/FAO/CONSSAN-TL, 2019). Gender norms are central to production, preparation and quality of food consumed by each family member). Cultural norms often prioritise men in food allocation. Tackling the constraints that women face in decision-making and their lack of control over food resources, which impact significantly on nutrition choices, is central for the prevention of malnutrition (Tomak 2016). The 2018-2023 Declaration of Maubisse on Rural Women’s Development an important inter-ministerial declaration, emphasises the relationship between educated mothers and better-nourished children. The Maubisse Declaration aims to eliminate all forms of discrimination against rural women and persons with disability in order to engage them in planning for public investments and in decision making processes. This declaration was renewed by sixteen Government entities, including the Timor-Leste National Commercial Bank (BNCTL). 
Voluntary National Review Of Timor-Leste 2019
Disability can also lead to malnutrition, particularly in children, and understanding the issues faced by children with disabilities is important to ensure vulnerable children are not left behind. Disability can contribute to malnutrition through feeding difficulties and specific nutritional needs associated with some impairments; discriminatory treatment of children with disabilities as well as their parents and caregivers; and increased health risks relating to hygiene and sanitation for children with disabilities. There is currently limited data and evidence publicly available on health for people with disabilities in Timor-Leste. 
Box 9: Innovation and partnership: Linking nutrition to youth development, agriculture and tourism 
The Agora Food Studio is an innovative social enterprise and restaurant in Dili which tracks its progress on the SDGs and aims to develop a generation of young Timorese leaders in the areas of food, coffee and cultural tourism. The Agora Food Studio works with development partners in Timor-Leste to address the SDGs through empowering local producers and entrepreneurs by using 90% local ingredients in the restaurant,  training and mentoring Timorese youths, tourist guesthouses and communities to innovate with locally grown nutritious foods and transforming them into tastier dishes, and normalising environmental sustainability through responsible production and consumption (e.g. no single-use plastics). The Agora Food Studio uses an “Impact Dashboard” (see figure 15) which provides up-to-date information on how the enterprise is contributing to achieving the SDGs. The dashboard measures the number of nutritious meals served (SDGs 2, 3), investment into the Timorese agricultural economy (SDGs 8, 10, 11) and how much single-use plastic has been avoided (SDGs 6, 11, 12, 13, 14). It is working with the SDG 2 Advocacy Hub in order to upgrade and scale-up the dashboard to a global level.  
	 	Figure 15:  Agora Food Studio’s SDG Impact Dashboard
Source: Agora Food Studio
Data availability 
The availability of data for SDG 2 indicators could be improved, with data available for 54 percent of indicators. Further improvements in 54% the collection of anthropometric data on child nutrition (stunting and wasting) are required in order to effectively monitor nutrition levels in the country.  Strengthening the collection of anthropometric data will 
reduce reliance on infrequent surveys and produce a more sustainable system of data collection and monitoring. 
Improving the quantity and quality of nutrition, health and agricultural data will strengthen understanding of the drivers of food insecurity and malnutrition and lead to evidence-based decision making.  Health, education, public works, and agriculture ministries all have important roles to play in improving data collection and analysis on the drivers of malnutrition. In particular, greater access to data on agriculture can also help improve agricultural productivity that is integral for food security and nutrition. In 2018 the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, in cooperation with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), developed its own monitoring and evaluation system in order to be able to collect, analyse and use data for improved evidence-based planning, programming and decision making. The monitoring and evaluation system will aim to track progress against indicators in relation to food and nutrition security in Timor-Leste. The General Directorate of Statistics from the Ministry of Finance is supporting the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to prepare a census on agriculture which will vastly improve the quality and quantity of data on agriculture. Improving the validity of data and strengthening new nation-wide collection of indicators (including gender-disaggregated data) on nutrition and underlying factors will make a significant contribution to efforts to tackle malnutrition in the country. 
Voluntary National Review Of Timor-Leste 2019
Achievements 
The country has made significant progress in improving child and maternal health, bringing down maternal mortality rates by 80 percent since 1990 (WHO, 2015a). The 2011-2030 National Health Sector Plan has played a concrete role in strengthening the quality of, and access to, free universal health services in Timor-Leste, as enshrined in the constitution. In 2016, there were 195 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births (DHS 2016). However, this rate is still high. Notably, the country achieved Millennium Development Goal 4 by reducing under-five mortality by two thirds (72 percent) since 1990 (WHO 2015b). The rate of children who die before their fifth birthday has dropped dramatically from 64 per 1,000 live births in 2009/10 to 41 per 1,000 live births in 2016 (DHS 2010 and 2016). These improvements may be attributed to investments in antenatal care and a significant increase in the proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel, increasing from 30 percent in 2009/2010 to 57 percent in 2016 (DHS 2009/2010 and 2016). More than 3 in 4 (77 percent) women made the recommended four or more antenatal care visits, an increase from 55 percent in 2009-10 (DHS 2009/2010 and 2016). This progress is notable not at least because at the time of the restoration of independence, the majority of the country’s infrastructure including health facilities had been destroyed. 
Over the past 15 years Timor-Leste has demonstrated a rapid decline in the total fertility rate in women of reproductive age. Between 2000-2005 the fertility rate was 7.0, reported to be one of the highest in the world (UN Population Division, 2007). By 2015 the fertility rate was 4.5 (Census, 2015). This indicates that the average woman of reproductive age (15–49 years) could be expected to have 4.5 children. Notably, this is higher in rural areas (5.1 children per woman) than urban areas (3.2 children per women (Census 2015). This fertility rate is still quite high, and one of the highest in Asia. Only 47 percent of women of reproductive age (15-49 years) say that their demand for family planning is satisfied by modern methods (DHS 2016). 

Box 10: Demographic dividend and reproductive health
While fertility rates have declined rapidly in Timor-Leste, the rate is still high. A ‘demographic dividend’ means an accelerated productivity growth that comes from a decline in a country’s birth rates. This trend in the decline of birth rates needs to continue for the demographic dividend to take-off. Timor-Leste has one of youngest populations in the world, with 74 percent of its population under the age of 35 and 39 percent below the age of 15 (Census, 2015).  The high fertility rate has led to a population age structure that shows the nation is at the early stage of a bulge among children and youth. 
In 2016 the adolescent birth rate for women aged 15-19 years was 52 per 1,000 (Census, 2015), down from 66 per 1,000 (Census, 2010). This represents 5.6 percent of adolescent women aged 15-19 that have begun childbearing with their first child, down from 6.4 percent in 2010 (Census, 2015). As thirty-five percent of women age 20-49 marry when they are teenagers and the median age of marriage is 21.7, this has a significant impact on early pregnancy (DHS, 2016). 
Women with no education have an average of 4.8 children, compared to 3.3 children among women with more than secondary education (DHS 2016).  Supporting young women to access reproductive health education will support their inclusion in education and the labour market and help promote gender equality. The new pre-secondary and secondary school curricula which are being developed will help contribute to this.  Investments in education, health and reproductive health education will create the right mix of demographic and social conditions to make a significant contribution to utilising the growing population and reaping the demographic dividend. 
The progress in child and maternal health is driven partly by the investment in the health workforce and the strengthening of health systems in Timor-Leste. The commitment to invest in improving human resources in the health sector is evidenced by increased numbers of health professionals across most areas. For example, in 2010, the health workforce consisted of only 233 physicians (including 169 expatriate Doctors). This constituted a ratio of 0.20 doctors /1000 people. This ratio was expected to dramatically rise to 1.79/1,000 people in 2018 (Dussault G., et al. 2013). This represents almost a doubling of the ratio of the health workforce (nurses, physicians and midwives) /1,000 people in just eight years and have been a key driver in improving health outcomes. Despite this significant increase, there is still a notable skills imbalance and a significant shortage of health workers in rural areas, and challenges exist in retaining workers in rural areas (Asante, A.D., et al., 2013).  Improving equity in the geographical distribution of health professionals will make a critical contribution to addressing disparities between municipalities. 


Box 11: Saude na Familia: Bringing healthcare to the doorstop
The Ministry of Health’s flagship comprehensive service package for primary health care has played an integral role in strengthening rural access to health care. This programme, Saude na Familia, modelled on the Cuban primary health care system, aims to deliver key health services to its people at their doorstep and is designed to ensure that “no one is left behind”. Through ‘domiciliary visits’, health professionals assess, register and follow up the health status of all household members. By bringing health care to households and communities and identifying individuals requiring follow up, it should have a considerable impact on reducing maternal and child mortality. By May 2017, medical teams had visited an impressive 94 percent of Timor-Leste’s households through the Saude na Familia programme (WHO 2017a). 
Timor-Leste is on track to eliminate malaria by 2021 through cutting the incidence rate by 99 percent in 11 years (WHO, 2017) and achieving a zero-incidence rate in 2016 (Ministry of Health 2018)14. The streak of zero malaria cases has continued well so far in 2019.  This is due to the success of the comprehensive National Malaria Control Programme. Timor-Leste has moved from the ‘control phase’ to the ‘elimination phase’ and has recently developed and costed the National Malaria Elimination Strategy 2018-2021. The Ministry of Health is also focused on eliminating neglected tropical diseases, such as lymphatic filariasis and yaws and targeting the control of soil-transmitted helminths (worms), which is endemic in Timor. The latter has a notable impact on child nutrition. The Government has created an integrated plan for the control of Neglected Tropical Diseases Control and Elimination programme for the period 2016-2021, which will also contribute to addressing malnutrition. In addition, practices to prevent malaria, worms, and other tropical diseases are also promoted through the school curricula at all levels.  
Challenges
While there has been notable progress in raising vaccination rates of Timorese children, levels have since remained stable since 2009/2010. In 2016, 49 percent of children (aged 12-23 months) received all basic vaccinations in the Timorese national vaccination programme, which is a slight reduction from 2009/10 when 53 percent of children received all basic vaccinations (DHS 2010 and 2016). Children living in Baucau (67 percent) are more than twice as likely as children living in Ermera (31 percent) to receive all basic vaccinations (DHS 2016), see figure 17.  Illustrating the importance of education for child health, and the interconnection between SDGs, there is a strong link between mother’s education and vaccinations rates (see figure 16).  
 	

In 2016, the Government of Timor-Leste began accelerating the control of vaccine-preventable diseases. It significantly expanded the immunisation programme through adding five new vaccinations to the child immunisation schedule. In 2017, a post-introduction evaluation revealed that the new introduced vaccines were well integrated and accompanied by effective national plans and budget (WHO, 2017a).  Remarkably, since 1995 the country is polio free and most recently was certified as measles-free by the WHO South East Asia Region (WHO, 2017a). Timor-Leste is only the third country in the region to have achieved this public health feat. This highlights the potential for maintaining the progress that has been made since the restoration of independence in child immunisation.
 	Figure 17: Basic vaccination coverage of children under 2 years of age

Box 12: Innovation: Establishing partnerships with other countries to strengthen Timor-Leste’s immunisation programme
The Governments of Timor-Leste and Sri Lanka signed a two-year ‘twinning agreement’ in 2017 to share knowledge of Sri Lanka’s highly successful immunisation programme, achieving 99 percent vaccination coverage (WHO, 2017a). This agreement builds knowledge sharing between the two countries and aims to strengthen the project management skills of health officials in Timor-Leste that work on the immunisation program. A similar arrangement between Timor-Leste and Australia was established to build the capacity of the Timorese National Immunisation Technical Advisory Group (NITAG) which was also created to guide evidence-based immunisation policy decisions and recommendations.
The incidence of tuberculosis (TB) in Timor-Leste is considerable (498 per 100,000) (WHO, 2017a), and is one of the single highest causes of hospital deaths in the country (WHO, 2017a). The National Tuberculosis Control Programme is devoting significant resources to address this problem and to help Timor-Leste become a TB-free society by 2030. As part of the programme, new guidelines for Paediatric and Extra Pulmonary tuberculosis were developed to support clinical training for medical professionals, in particular, midwives and doctors, to help quick detection of the disease in mothers and children. Currently, the national TB programme is revising the guidelines for tuberculosis as well as drug-resistant TB treatment.
Timor-Leste has a low prevalence of HIV, less than 1 percent in the general population (Ministry of Health, 2015), although the number of reported cases continues to increase. The first case of HIV was reported in 2003. In 2018, there were 148 new diagnosed HIV cases (Ministry of Health, 2018), however, the prevalence rate among “key high risk populations”, such as commercial sex workers, men who have sex with men, and injecting drug users remains relatively low at 5 percent (DHS, 2016).  In order to sustain this low prevalence rate, it is important to improve knowledge of the disease among young people who account for more than half of those newly infected with HIV (WHO, 2017b). Notably, knowledge of HIV/AIDS among students 13-17 years is relatively low with only 65 percent reporting having ever heard about HIV/AIDS (WHO, 2017b). The DHS (2016) also reveals that the proportion of men and women (15-49 years) who know where to get an HIV test has declined. In 2009/2010 17 percent of women and 35 percent of men knew where to get a HIV test (DHS 2009/10). In 2016 this had reduced to 7 percent among women and 26 percent among men (DHS 2016).  Continued effort is therefore required to improve knowledge of the disease and available testing facilities and to strengthen access to sexual reproductive health and rights education.  
Non-communicable diseases (such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes or chronic respiratory disease) account for 45 percent of all deaths in Timor-Leste (WHO, 2018a), highlighting the importance of looking ahead to future health lifestyle challenges facing the country. Linked to this is the very high rate of tobacco smoking among men, with 70.6 percent of all men smoking compared to 28.9 percent of women (WHO, 2014).  In addition, nine out of ten adults are exposed to tobacco smoke in their homes and 51 per cent were exposed to secondhand smoke in their workplace (WHO, 2014). With 16.4 years as the mean age of starting smoking (WHO, 2014), tobacco use prevalence among students s is high. 27.6 percent of adolescents aged 13–17 years use tobacco, with 39.6 percent of boys using tobacco and 15.6 percent of girls (WHO, 2017b). This highlights the need to pay attention and carefully monitor the risk factors associated with the unhealthy behaviours. Continuing to strengthen strategies to control non-communicable diseases will be vital in reducing the additional burden they place on health systems. Crucially, the MEJD and the Ministry of Health are collaborating to communicate messages about healthy lifestyle choices in these areas. Non-communicable diseases, and other issues such as de-worming, are also incorporated in the school curricula, with support from the Ministry of Health. 
Leaving no one behind
Despite facility births doubling from 2009/2010 to 2016, 51 percent of births still occurred at home, and delivery by skilled health personnel differs dramatically by municipality, from 20 percent in Ermera and to 85 percent in Dili (DHS 2016) (see figure 
18).  Reaching very rural communities with health care services is a challenge with 70 percent of the population living in small, dispersed villages isolated by mountainous terrain. A costed improvement plan for emergency obstetric and neonatal care was created in 2016 to reduce maternal mortality and improve birth outcomes. This plan focuses on the development of a sustainable training programme for health workers with a focus on immediate postpartum care.  In order to continue making significant advances in reducing maternal mortality, a Maternal Death Surveillance Review System to count and investigate every maternal death was established at the National hospital and 5 referral hospitals. Supporting the full implementation of this plan will be key to maintain and speed up progress on maternal health.  It will be necessary to continue strengthening antenatal delivery and postnatal care in remote rural areas to continue driving this progress and address disparities.
 	Figure 18: Skilled assistance during delivery, by Municipality

0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90%
Source: DHS 2016
Despite massive improvements in child mortality, the under-5 mortality rate differs significantly by municipality, demonstrating the challenge in leaving no one behind. For example, in Lautem there were 19 deaths per 1,000 live births compared to 76 deaths per 1,000 live births in Oé-Cusse. More effort will also be needed to address the inequality in health outcomes, as children from the poorest households are more than twice as likely to die before their fifth birthday as children from the richest households.  The main causes of child mortality are due to preventable diseases, with 18 percent due to pneumonia, 10 percent due to diarrhoea (WHO, 2015b).  
Box 13: Using volunteers to ensure no one is left behind
Although the Saude na Familia programme has enabled doctors to reach rural areas, there are still remote locations where doctors do not reach. Saude Ba Ema Hotu - SABEH (Health for all), a locally registered health association, was established by a single doctor to fill the gap where domiciliary visits may miss certain households. Despite the increase in the number of health posts, there are still a number of remote Sucos (villages) that do not have a doctor stationed there or have not seen a doctor for a number of years and have ac-

cess to little or no medicine. Volunteer doctors, midwifes and nurses who all sign up for a one-year voluntary period, travel to remote mountainous areas, carrying medicines and equipment on their backs. They provide free medical services to Sucos with no access to a doctor.  The volunteers then provide regular visits twice a month for these Sucos. This is the first long-term voluntary programme in the country and aims to encourage Timorese doctors to consider working in rural areas. This programme, while only small, has succeeded in creating partnerships with some private sector companies and individuals to help raise funds for transportation and medicine.
Although persons with disabilities face a number of health concerns, the Ministry of Health is developing a number of initiatives to promote an inclusive health service. The Ministry of Health has recently launched a disability booklet for persons with disabilities in Timor-Leste. The disability booklet helps improve relationships between persons with disabilities and their medical providers. It provides health staff with disability information they might not be familiar with. It records the diagnosis, as well as treatment and referrals, helping them understand the needs of individual patients with disabilities. 
Data availability 
An impressive 96 percent of data for SDG 3 indicators is available. The World Health Organization collects a lot of data related to SDG 3, which 96% makes an important contribution. The data that has not been collected for this SDG relates primarily to the HIV incidence rate.  As is common in many least developed countries, the size of the uninfected popula-
tion is not known. This data is needed to calculate the HIV incidence rate. There is also little information on health facilities that have a core set of essential medicines.
Achievements
The attendance rate15 for primary school has risen impressively from 65 percent in 2001 to 92 percent in 2015 (Census 2015). The investments in education have led to significant numbers of children attending school.  The percentage of the Timorese population (Census 2015) aged 6 to 17 years in school is at the highest ever at 82.6 percent. In five years, from 2009/2010 to 2015, school attendance in pre-secondary and secondary school doubled (Census 2015). 
   Figure 19: Net enrolment rates using Government EMIS data 
	male	female
	20%	Pre-School	21%
	85%	Basic Education	93%
	47%	Pre-Secondary	60%
	33%	Secondary	44%
Source: Ministry of Education EMIS 2018
In Secondary education, there was a growth of 24.8 percent corresponding to an average annual growth rate of 4.5 percent. However, despite this, significant falls in attendance rates appear to take place between primary (92 percent) and pre-secondary (44.2 percent), particularly in rural areas (see Figure 20). The rapidly increasing youth population imposes enormous pressure on the education system and creates a major challenge in providing quality education services.  
	 	      Figure 20: 
Net Attendance ratio in pre-secondary by Municipality, 2015

The transformation in education infrastructure is notable with over 300 new primary schools built between 2006 and 2011 (World Bank, 2018a). Between 2000 and 2010 the number of pre-secondary schools increased from 97 to 245 (Census Education Monograph 2015). In comparison, in 1975 there were two Secondary General Schools and one Technical -Vocational School. Following the restoration of independence, a large number of schools were destroyed and many teachers left the country. According to the Civil Society Education Partnership (2018), while significant investment in building classrooms has taken place, due to the huge demographic pressure on the education system, and the tradition for settlements to be spread out over long distances, there are still insufficient classrooms.  This leads to double and triple shifts at schools, reducing the day for students, and limiting the quality of education students receive. The Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA 2017) shows that while hours of teaching and learning should be 4.5 hours per day, actual contact time is only around 66 percent of that (MEJD, 2017). A lack of sufficient classrooms can increase the student/teacher ratios, which are still relatively high in some schools. It is estimated that 1,871 public classrooms are needed by 2030 (130 are in pre-school education, 1,573 in primary and 168 in secondary education (MEJD/
World Bank 2019). It is calculated that to achieve these required numbers of classrooms, US$69.9 million will be needed by 2030, with the Government needing to mobilise about US$56.1 million for investment in public school infrastructure (MEJD/World Bank 2019).
Timor-Leste has successfully managed to narrow the gender gap in education, achieving gender parity in primary and pre-school education in nearly all regions across the country. Boys and girls are attending primary education at an almost equal rate, with a gender parity index of 1 (Census 2015) and only slight gender differences in the other levels of education. The gender parity index of pre-secondary and secondary education is 1.21 and 1.20 respectively, indicating that there are more girls at the appropriate age than boys. Interestingly there is a slight difference in favour of female children in education, however this difference can be explained by the fact that there are more male children who repeat grades. In 2016, 5 percent of boys repeated their sixth grade compared to 3 percent of girls (EMIS, MEJD, 2016).
Literacy levels have risen rapidly among all ages, which is central for promoting sustainable development. The adult basic literacy rate (15 +years) in 2015, stood at 64.4 percent, and rose rapidly from 57.8 percent in just 5 years in 2010 (Census 2010 and 2015). There have been strong improvements in literacy rates in Tetun among young people (see figure 21 below). In 2010 only 68.9 percent of young people aged 10-14 years could read and write; however, 5 years later this stood at 80.2 percent showing marked progress (Census, 2010 and 2015). Crucially, both girls and boys demonstrate good levels of functional literacy and numeracy skills, demonstrating strong gender equity in literacy (Census 2015). However, it is important to note that these are self-reported literacy levels and more vigorous and timely learning evaluations need to be administered by the MEJD to more accurately assess student literacy and numeracy abilities. A new evidence-based curriculum for pre-school and primary levels was finalised in 2015. This progressive curriculum focuses on developing cognitive and social capabilities, as well as promoting creativity and problem-solving skills. Improvements in education quality are vital for monitoring progress against SDG 4 and targeting investments. However, enhancing the quality of education and tackling the disparities between urban and rural areas, and between municipalities, will take some time. Although the majority 94 percent of youth (15-24 years) in urban areas report  basic levels of reading and writing, this reduces to 78.5 percent in rural areas (Census 2015).
 	 	 	Figure 21: Percentage of persons literate in a particular language, by age

                                                                                                                                                                                               
  Source: Census 2015   
 
The new curriculum appears to be already having an impact on learning outcomes and is an important tool for improving quality education. An Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) was conducted in 2017 in order to understand the short-term effects of the new curriculum and new management practices. When comparing 2017 results with EGRA 2009, substantial progress is noted in class 1 particularly in word recognition and comprehension, with mean gains of 84% and 109.2% respectively (MEJD/World Bank 2019). Despite this average increase, there were still a high number of students scoring zero on comprehension, with only small improvements since 2009 (MEJD/World Bank 2019. These results show that while advancements in student learning are taking place, the number of students with no learning (scoring zero in the test) has remained virtually the same.  This research may show that, while the curriculum facilitates and improves learning for some, it is still in its early days and has not yet reached maximum effect. This highlights the importance of continuing to strengthen implementation of the curriculum in all municipalities and schools and continuing to support teacher training and mentoring in the new curriculum, as well as reinforcing school management and teacher discipline.
Between 2000 and 2010 there was a significant increase in the number of pre-secondary teachers from 65 to 2,411 (Census 2015 Education Monograph). Over the past six years, the number of teachers remained stable until 2014, when the number of basic education teachers recorded in the Ministry’s database grew by 30 percent between 2014 and 2015 (MEJD/World Bank, 2019). Secondary education also noted an increase of 29 percent between 2014 and 2016.  Despite this increase, due to the growth of student numbers, student-teacher ratio still remains quite high in some schools, while quite low in others. This demonstrates the importance of equitable deployment of teachers to keep up with demand and ensure equitable coverage. Several initiatives and teacher training programs have been launched to upgrade teachers’ academic qualifications and restructure their professional status. The establishment of the National Training Institute (INFORDEPE) is making an important contribution to training teachers on curriculum content, teaching methodologies, and on the official languages of instruction in Timor-Leste (Portuguese and Tetun). However, challenges still exist in ensuring teachers have a good command of the official languages and possess sufficient scientific and pedagogic competencies.
According to the EGRA 2017, learning in class 1 improved since 2009, in large part because of learning basic literacy in Tetun, which is the most widely spoken official language in Timor-Leste (MEJD/World Bank 2019). As 66 percent of children speak a different language at home from the language they use at school, addressing communication barriers is important for improving student learning outcomes (Census, 2015). The new curriculum, which is in line with the policy on official languages, specifies that the medium of instruction in early basic education is to be in Tetun, with a carefully planned introduction to literacy in Portuguese. Portuguese is then the primary language of instruction in the third cycle of education in pre-secondary and secondary school. The EMBLI Mother Tongue Based Multilingual Education pilot project that started in 2012, has demonstrated that children’s academic performance improves markedly when they are taught in the student’s primary language in the early basic education (Walter, 2016). Continuing to focus teaching on a single language (Tetun Dili) in basic education, whilst at the same time developing progressive understanding of Portuguese, whilst improving teacher pedagogical ability  and literacy in both official languages will be important for improving quality education.   
Box 14: Reforming secondary education: linking skills for life to the SDGs 
In recognition of the importance of equipping young learners with practical skills and competencies needed to engage in a dynamic economy, the MEJD is reforming the curriculum of both pre-secondary and secondary school (years 7-9 and 10 - 12). These curriculum will emphasise communication skills, languages, mathematics, and, interestingly, in secondary level will aim to frame both natural sciences and social sciences within the framework of the SDGs as they apply to Timor-Leste. For the first time all senior students will learn biology, chemistry, physics, history, economics and sociology through the prism of health, food and nutrition, renewable energy, inclusion policy, decent work and other topics covered in the SDGs. This will help them apply their skills to the context and environment of Timor-Leste and support them to make better choices about their careers.  
In the last five years, the number of students in higher education has more than doubled, with an increase of 113 percent from 27,009 in 2011 to 57,436 in 2016 (MEJD/World Bank 2019). Timor-Leste’s higher education sector has grown rapidly. In 2016, the country 11 accredited institutions, 10 private and one public. This is largely attributed to the effective implementation of the Strategic Education Plan (2011-2030), which focuses on improving quality and access to higher education. Despite the doubling of enrolment in higher education, only one quarter of young people aged (18-24 years) were enrolled between 2011 and 2016, with a higher percentage for boys (27 percent) than girls (23 percent) (MEJD/World Bank 2019). This means that approximately 75 percent of young people are outside higher education, which may have spill on effects for equipping young persons with skills needed for a dynamic economy. Furthermore, there are very limited jobs available for new graduates. Based on population projections using 2015 Census data (see figure 22), if the population continues to increase rapidly (high fertility scenario in Figure 

22), there is estimated to be an additional 20,000 children of school age (6-17 years) and 300,000 more people of working age (GDS and UNFPA, 
2015b) by 2030. This will place significant pressures on the education system and labour market. According to UNFPA, for Timor-Leste to benefit from demographic dividend, the fertility rate needs to decline more rapidly. 
 	Figure 22: Population Projections for Timor-Leste
	Medium fertility scenario	
	Low fertility scenario	
   Source: General Directorate of Statistics (GDS) and United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), (2015). Analytical Report on Population Projection. Dili: Timor-Leste

Box 15: Youth, education and the demographic dividend 
In 2015, 20.3 percent of the youth population (15-24) were not currently engaged in employment, education, nor in training (NEET) (Census, 2015).  This has remained mainly constant since 2009/2010. The rate of youth (15-24 years) who had participated in formal and non-formal education and training in the previous 12 months was 63.3 percent for young men and 58.6 percent for young women (Census 2015). The growing youth population has the potential to place strong pressures on the education system (potentially affecting both attendance levels and quality) and on the job market. It is integral for young people to gain at least a basic education, so that they can fully engage in a modern economy.  However, interestingly young people who have secondary education and tertiary education are more likely to be unemployed than those with secondary education (MEJD/World Bank, 2019). The skills of young people need to be better aligned with the labour market, and vocational training has an important role to play. Young people stated in the VNR consultation that decent employment opportunities and quality education are needed now for young people, otherwise disaffected youth may become a source of social and political instability. 
The MEJD has recently established Community Learning Centres in nine municipalities to help people who have dropped out of education to reconnect and complete basic school equivalency and will gradually include secondary school equivalency as well. The idea behind these centres is to help people apply themselves to life-long learning, whether it is developing their land, their business, seeking overseas work or standing for local office. In Dili, one of these centres caters for students with disabilities, teaching blind students in the morning and deaf students in the afternoon. The curriculum aims to bring them up to the level of other learners so they can enter mainstream schools or continue their education in the community learning centres.
Challenges
Despite improvements in literacy and school attendance, further progress is needed to improve the quality of education children receive at all levels of education.  According to World Bank analysis from the Human Capital Index (World Bank, 2018c), a Timorese child who starts school at age 4 can expect to complete almost 10 years (9.9) of school by the time the child turns 18. However, in terms of learning outcomes, using harmonised test scores, students in Timor-Leste score 371 on a scale where 625 signifies advanced attainment and 300 represents minimum attainment. The analysis from the Human Capital Index (World Bank, 2018c) reveals that when considering what children actually learn, expected (learning-adjusted) years of school declines to 5.9 years. This means that children who complete 10 years of education, actually only end up receiving 5.9 years of education, when it is adjusted for what they actually learn. It is subsequently estimated that an increase in 3 years in students’ learning is estimated to add nearly 1 percentage point to Timor-Leste’s long-term economic growth (World Bank, 2018c). Ensuring teachers are well-trained, motivated and able to support children with various special educational needsis important for enhancing quality education. Furthermore, ensuring students attend regularly, have sufficient contact hours, are able to understand the language of instruction, and are enrolled at the right age for their class all contribute to improving the quality of education children receive.

While attendance rates have risen rapidly, with 44 percent of the 13-15-year old population still in primary education, it is evident that insufficient numbers attend pre-school and many children do not attend primary school system at the appropriate age (Census 2015 Education Monograph) (see Figure 23). High repetition rates at the first years of schooling can signal that students are not reaching the education system ready to start first grade. 2017 EMIS data shows that Grade 1 repetition was 23.93 percent in 2017. International evidence suggests that being overage is one of the main reasons for student dropout (World Bank, 2018b). According to the Strategic Development Plan (SDP), the highest rate of dropouts occurs in the first 
Figure 23: Percentage of population 13-15 years old who are still in school, by educational level

Pre-Primary
4%

Census 2015

two years of primary school (Office of the Prime Minister (2010). Promoting pre-school education, addressing out-of-age schooling, and grade repetition among first graders is important to ensure children get the most out of their primary education. This can be done, in part, by giving extra attention to the youngest  learners, with teachers using the language of the learner to ensure comprehension, as well as using effective strategies to ensure early grade competencies in literacy and numeracy. The strong negative effect that stunting has on early grade student achievement must also be urgently addressed. 
Education expenditure has increased, showing a positive trend over the period 201116, rising from US$87.2 million in 2011 to about US$124.8million in 2016. Despite this increase in education spending, it has not grown proportionally with state expenditure (MEJD/World Bank 2019). Education expenditure as a percentage of GDP (non-oil and gas sector) was 10.2 percent in 2014, but then reduced to 8.5 percent in 2015 and 6.6 percent in 2016. When looking at education expenditure as a percentage of aggregate GDP (oil and gas sector and non-oil and gas sector), in 2014 it was 3.7 percent, rising to 4.4 percent in 2015 (MEJD/World Bank 2019). This is below the average for the region, which is 15.1 percent. In Indonesia 21 percent of expenditure of the state budget was allocated to education. While  20 percent was allocated to education in both Singapore and Malaysia. Timor-Leste has signed up to the Education 2030: Incheon Declaration Framework for Action that commits countries to allocate 15-20 percent of total Government budget/ expenditure to education. Increasing the education budget will be important to ensure spending keeps pace with growing demand and pressures on the education system.
Lack of adequate access to quality and demand-driven vocational training is hindering young men and women from attaining the skills needed in the labour market. Eight out of ten first-time jobseekers coming from secondary school lack job-specific skills, such as IT and literacy skills (SEPFOPE, 2014a). However, it is not just a lack of specific vocational skills that hinders their ability to access the limited jobs that do exist. Interestingly, 94.1 per cent of first-time job seekers who have attended technical and vocational schools bring the job specific skills needed, but 50 percent lack basic literacy and numeracy skills (SEPFOPE, 2014a). While this percentage is much lower for first time job seekers who had higher education, it is still quite high at 25 percent. A study of Technical, Vocational Education and Training (TVET) graduates showed that only 27 percent were in employment at the time of the survey, and TVET graduates from training centres only accounted for 6 percent of all employees hired for the period 2015 to June 2017 (SEPFOPE, 2014b). This shows that supply of graduates with vocational skills is insufficient to meet demand. The quality of vocational education is dependent on sufficient numbers of trained teachers. In vocational secondary skills, there are only 450 teachers, although this is an increase from the 300 teachers in 2014 (MEJD and World Bank, 2019). While the percentage of teachers with a teaching or bachelor’s degree in general and technical-vocational secondary education is quite high, 80 percent and 70 percent, it is still notable that 20 percent of teachers are not more qualified than their secondary students and only have secondary education. (MEJD and World Bank, 2019).
A Human Capital Development Fund has been established by the Government to provide scholarships and training to young people to enable them take advantage of opportunities in newly expanding sectors, like petroleum, tourism, agriculture and construction industries. It also includes technical training programmes for civil servants, as well as for young teachers, police and Defence forces, and scholarship programmes with the goal of obtaining an academic degree for civil servants.
Leaving no one behind 
Almost half of children with disabilities between 3 and 18 years are not at school, highlighting further attention is needed to ensure all young boys and girls can learn and thrive (MEJD/World Bank 2019). In 2017 the Government of Timor-Leste developed a progressive new national Inclusive Education Policy outlining the importance of education for all vulnerable children. In addition to focusing on children with disabilities, it also highlights the importance of targeting the inclusion of broader marginalised groups, such as children who do not speak the official languages of instruction, young mothers and pregnant adolescent girls. While this policy is an important step in ensuring no child is left behind, further effort is required to ensure its effective implementation. This was confirmed during the consultation with children and youth with disabilities for this VNR. They revealed that children still face significant obstacles thriving in education.  These include inaccessible infrastructure (no ramp or accessible toilet), community and family attitudes, and lack of access to assistive devices. While they reported attending school or training centres, many stated that teachers did not possess the necessary skills to teach children with special educational needs, including use of sign language and provision of braille. They also indicated that the curriculum of pre-secondary and secondary level does not sufficiently integrate issues faced by children with a disability. Furthermore, they often do not receive sufficient assistance once they leave the formal education system.
Box 16: Supporting teachers to put inclusive education into practice 
The AGAPE School of the Deaf is an innovative school that supports deaf children, trains deaf adults to be teachers for the deaf, and advocates for inclusive education. Recognising the challenges in ensuring teachers are equipped with the right skills to teach children with disabilities, AGAPE School of the Deaf has stepped into this gap. It has trained local deaf community members to be teachers and supports them to nurture new deaf students who have previously not received education. The teachers are taught compassion, resourcefulness and creativity. Through education and supporting young deaf students to attend school and training deaf teachers, they have challenged discrimination in the community, through demonstrating what persons with a disability can achieve. Some members of the deaf community are now currently developing the national sign Language of Timor-Leste.
Although there appears to be significant under-reporting on the numbers of persons with disabilities, there is some data to conclude that children with disabilities face a disadvantage in education (Census 2015 Education Monograph). In comparison to young women without disabilities (71.2 percent), only 33 percent of young women with disabilities (5-24 years) were attending school. Furthermore, 54.7 percent of young women with disabilities have never gone to school, whereas for young women without disabilities this is only 13.6 percent. (Census 2015 Education Monograph). 15.3 percent of persons with disabilities can read and write in any of the four working languages in the country (Census, 2015). In 2015, young women (aged 20-24) with disabilities had significantly lower literacy rates (21.9 percent) than young women without disabilities (81.8 percent) (Census 2015 Education Monograph). Special emphasis needs to be placed on ensuring these children enter school, as well as ensuring proper support for them during their years in formal education. 
Adolescent mothers face additional barriers completing their education and there is sharp decline in the attendance of young mothers from age 15 to aged 19. At age 15, 61.5 percent of young mothers are in school, whereas at age 19 only 12.4 percent are still in school (compared to 68 percent of non-mothers) (Census 2015) . As part of the Inclusive Education Policy, the Government of Timor-Leste, in partnership with key 



stakeholders, is currently developing a re-entry policy for girls who left school due to pregnancy, prohibiting disciplinary actions against pregnant girls. The key challenge for parents, teachers, communities and education officials will be to ensure that this policy is implemented. The consultation process for this report in Baucau revealed communities are committed to ensure this policy is put into practice. A lack of education also increases a young girl’s chances of having a child at a very young age (Census 2015 Education Monograph). The percentage of young women who never went to school is more than two times higher for adolescent mothers (22.8 percent) than for those who never gave birth (9.5 percent) (Census 2015 Education Monograph). Ensuring young mothers continue their education is also central for ensuring the health and nutrition of their infant and breaking the intergenerational cycle of malnutrition and poverty. Children born to mothers with no education or only primary level education are more likely to be stunted or wasted, than those born to mothers with more education (DHS 2016). Comprehensive reproductive health education, which can play an important role in reducing teenage pregnancy, is part of the education curriculum. However, there are challenges implementing it due to a lack of knowledge among teachers and administrators.  
Despite recognising the importance for preschool education, the number of students attending preschool is still low. 48.6 percent of 5-year-old children are not in either pre-school or primary schools (MEJD/World Bank 2019). However, attendance of girls is slightly higher than boys. Pre-school is integral in ensuring that children who arrive in primary school are well-nourished, and ready to learn, and can expect to achieve genuine learning while at school. According to the Census, which includes community-run preschools, 45.9 percent of children were participating in some form of organised early childhood education or learning activity in the one-year before the official primary age (Census 2015). However, according to EMIS education data (2016), which doesn’t include community-run schools, access to preschool education is much lower, covering only 21 percent of children of preschool age 3 – 6 years old. The development of a National Policy for Early Childhood Development is an important step in improving preschool education. The MEJD is prioritising early childhood education and is investing in the construction, rehabilitation and accreditation of preschools as a key priority. Expanding access to preschool education using alternative delivery modes, such as community-run preschools and other school readiness initiatives are be considered. Community-run preschools are also an important entry point for accessing vulnerable families and promoting community cohesion (UNICEF, 2016). There is also a greater need for teachers to use effectively the primary language of the students to begin bridging to the official languages.
Box 17: Measuring Human capital: nutrition, preschool education and productivity 
Enhancing human capital is critical to generate inclusive growth, reduce poverty and create a more productive and healthy society.  Human capital can be thought of as part of a country’s total wealth; part of the knowledge, skills, and health that people accumulate in their lifetime. Investing in people – through quality education, health care, and nutrition – can therefore lead to higher individual earnings and a more productive economy. A child born in Timor-Leste today will grow up to be almost half (43 percent) as productive as they could be, if they enjoyed complete high-quality education and full health.
Source: World Bank, Human Capital Index Timor-Leste, 2018c
Data availability 
Timor-Leste currently has 56 percent of data available for the indicators for SDG 4. The MEJD is aiming to improve the way it manages and uses 56% data through introducing systematic improvements using information technology. Currently, data collection in the Education Management 
Information System (EMIS) is carried out manually and only twice a 
year. The improvements to data collection aim to improve the regularity and quality of data collection. 
The main data that is missing relates to learning outcomes, due to a lack of internationally comparable learning assessments (4.1.1). Early Grade Reading Assessments (EGRA) have been conducted in 2009 and 2017, however they were not always national in scope. The assessments can be considered as a baseline for future learning assessments. Improving internationally comparable learning assessments is central to monitor education quality and learning outcomes and to target investments. It is also important to ensure that the next Census in 2020 improves both the questionnaire and the interview methodology in relation to persons with disabilities, so a more accurate picture of inclusive education can be established. Future Census and Demographic and Health Surveys should also fully adopt the set of six questions related to disability from the internationally recognised UN Washington Group on Disability Statistics, to ensure accurate data on children with disabilities in the education system is collected. In addition, the Census and DHS do not include education questions relating to reading and maths proficiency (4.1) and there is little official administrative data on the training of teachers (4.c.1). It should be noted that in relation to the Data Management System (EMIS), the MEJD plans to train school coordinators to properly use the Washington questions on disability. This will ensure more accurate data on children with special educational needs is collected. The MEJD is expanding EMIS to include tracking student performance and teacher qualifications, including pre-service and in-service trainings.
Achievements
Women hold 38 percent of the parliamentary seats, one of the highest in the world and the highest in Asia and the Pacific (Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2018). The Electoral Law for the National Parliament states that the lists of actual and alternate candidates must include at least one woman for each set of three candidates. The national Women’s Network (Rede Feto), Secretariat of State for Equality and Inclusion, and the Group of Women Parliamentarians in Timor-Leste (GMPTL) played a key role in advocating for the establishment of the quota system. The GMPTL brings together all women in Parliament, regardless of their political party affiliation, to work on maximising women’s participation and eliminating all forms of discrimination. Despite high levels of women’s participation in the National Parliament, women only make up 6 out of 29 positions in the Members of Government, which includes Ministers and Secretaries of State (Secretariat for Equality and Inclusion, 2019). Currently no women are appointed as Administrator at municipal and sub-district levels. However, the Village Election Law, which requires at least one woman to stand for election in every Suco (village), has led to an increased number of female Village Chiefs from 2.5 percent in 2009 to 5 percent in 2016, although this is still very low (UN Women, 2016). This rise in female Village chiefs can partly be attributed to the innovative ‘100 percent Hau Prontu’ advocacy initiative (100% I’m ready), which encourages and prepares women for leadership regardless of party affiliation (See Box 18). 

Box 18: Encouraging Female Leadership 
The “100 percent Hau Prontu” initiative (100% I’m ready), is a Government-NGO partnership which encourages and prepares women for leadership, under the slogan ‘Feto Forte, Nasaun Forte’, Strong Women, Strong Nation. This programme aimed to increase the number of female candidates standing for upcoming Suco and municipal elections. Representation at the Suco (village) level is crucial, as chiefs identify priorities for development support, coordinate delivery of services, and have an important role in dispute resolution and ensuring access to justice, including in domestic violence cases. The “100 percent Hau Prontu” campaign began in 2014 through an alliance of Government partners, civil society organizations, and international agencies. The campaign identified 319 women leaders and prepared them to stand for election. The Secretariat of State for the Promotion of Equality and Inclusion also provided financial support to the Fundação Pátria organisation to implement leadership training for potential women candidates in three municipalities, giving them guidance on the electoral law, gender equality, public speaking, campaigning and advocacy. Women were also provided opportunities to be heard and to grow their networks by providing a space to come together and speak with a common voice. 
Women are also now increasingly represented in the civil service (35 percent)16 (2017) the police force (15 percent)17 and military service (10 percent)18, although these levels are still quite low. In 2016, the Government of Timor-Leste approved a National Action Plan for the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 (on Women, Peace and Security) to include women in decision-making positions for peace and security (Concluding Observations CEDAW). Ensuring women’s full and effective participation and equal opportunities for leadership at all levels of decision-making in political, economic and public life is important for promoting inclusive economic growth and sustaining peace. The Labour Law prohibits discrimination based on gender when hiring new staff, however, overcoming gender attitudes of both men and women, towards the role of women in politics, decision-making and management of resources can take time. Gender issues still require a lot of attention given that only 22.9 percent of managerial positions are held by women in the public service (Census 2015 Labour Force Report). To address this matter, the Government approved a number of decrees on recruitment and promotion to give preference to women in the event of equality between men and women candidates. The Ministry of Public Works is aiming to promote at least 30 percent female participation in infrastructure development through the Road for Development Social Safeguard Frameworks. These frameworks provide guidance to Ministry of Public Works, local contractors and other actors to recruit at least 30 percent women and 2 percent of persons with disabilities in road works (ILO, 2018).
Timor-Leste has strengthened Government decision-making and consultative bodies for gender equality and the empowerment of women. After the restoration of Independence in 2002, an office for the Advisor to the Prime Minister on the Promotion of Equality was established, which was transformed into a Governmental body, the Secretariat of State. The Secretariat sits under, and reports directly, to the Prime Minister and continues to advocate, coordinate, and evaluate gender-sensitive policies, laws, programs, plans, and budgets for the promotion of gender equality, empowerment of girls and women, and social inclusion. The incumbent secretariat is a member of the Council of Ministers and is an observer on the Budget Review Committee ensuring that gender is mainstreamed into Government’s plans and budgets. Three levels of coordination - an Inter-ministerial Working Group for Gender, the National Gender Working Group, and the Municipal Gender Working Group – have been established to enhance Government coordination, resource allocation, gender mainstreaming and monitoring of Government gender commitments at all levels. The constitution prohibits gender discrimination, and gender mainstreaming has been adopted as a key strategy by the Government of Timor-Leste for achieving gender equality by 2030. Gender has been mainstreamed in the enactment of the electoral law for the national parliament, the village election law, and the political parties’ law, which promote the participation of women in the governing bodies.   
Good progress has been made in tracking public allocations for gender equality and women’s empowerment, in line with recommendations from the Convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women (CEDAW). As part of the budgetary governance roadmap, gender-responsive budgeting was developed to integrate gender equality into planning, budget and monitoring and evaluation processes. It aims to ensure that gender equality commitments are translated into action in the annual plans and budgets. The introduction of programme budgeting in Timor-Leste has provided an entry point for starting gender mainstreaming across Government programmes, requiring each line ministry to include specific gender activities as part of their overall plan and to include at least one gender programme. Due to challenges with capacity, coordination and resources allocated to gender-responsive budgeting, it is still being rolled out. A gender marker has been created and included in the Government Financial Management Information System ‘FMIS’, to help track the proportion of funds earmarked and expended for the promotion of gender equality. The Secretariat of State for Equality and Inclusion is also an observer to the Budget Review Committee ensuring that all ministries and agencies mainstream gender and allocate enough resources as part of their overall budget submissions. 
Challenges
High prevalence rates of Intimate Partner Violence (IPV) have been identified in Timor-Leste, indicating that further efforts are required to ensure women’s safety and security. According to the 2016 DHS, 38 percent of ever-partnered women age 15-49 have experienced physical/ sexual IPV in their lifetime, while that of the 2016 Nabilan Study (The Asia Foundation, 2016c) was found to be 59 percent.  35 percent of women have experienced physical/sexual IPV in the last 12 months as stated in the 2016 DHS, whereas the Nabilan Study reports levels at 47 percent. While both the 2016 Nabilan Study and the 2016 DHS collected data on women’s experiences of IPV, the results were higher in the 2016 Nabilan Study compared with the 2016 DHS.  The prevalence of gaps is due to methodological differences19. Currently there are no provisions in the penal code specifically criminalising marital rape and incest. The law against domestic violence (2010) and the enactment of the penal code have been significant milestones in addressing domestic violence. Recognising the need to ensure implementation of the law, the National Action Plan (NAP) on Gender-Based Violence (GBV) and guidelines to address sexual harassment in the public service were developed. A gender-based violence referral partners network has been established for a number of years to coordinate all agencies and partners who support women and children who experience violence. 
Box 19: Use of innovative technology to tackle sexual harassment and gender-based violence
The Government is using mobile applications to support this referral network and improve service delivery to victims. The Hamahon mobile application, supported by development partners, provides detailed information on Government services (such as health, justice and social services).  that are available to victims of gender-based violence Another application, the ChatBot Rosa, is an innovative application for citizens to report cases of sexual harassment by a public servant in the workplace or a public place. This initiative was launched by the Civil Service Commission, with support from donors, and is part of the Government’s strategy to reduce harassment in the public sector and improve the quality of services. 
Women and men also suffer violence from people other than their partner, although this is lower than partner violence, demonstrating the persistence of gender-based violence.  Violence against people who are LGBTI was raised in our consultation as an important issue. While there is little data on violence against the LGBTI community, research on LGBTI issues conducted by the Women’s Network Rede Feto, and the ASEAN SOGIE Caucus – a network of LGBTI activities in Asia revealed that 87 percent of  respondents had faced harassment and violence due to their sexual and gender orientation (Rede Feto and ASEAN SOGIE Caucus, 2017).  The Nabilan study (The Asia Foundation, 2016c) found that 9.5 percent of women and girls (15 years and older) had suffered violence from people other than their intimate partner in the previous 12 months. Crucially the law on domestic violence has increased the number of domestic violence cases being brought before the courts.  There is mandatory reporting to the police by doctors when they suspect or are told of domestic violence by their patients, and enforcement of this is improving. However, cases of domestic violence are often typically resolved at the family level, and only escalated to the community or to Government authorities if a solution can’t be found. Access to specialised police and judicial processes are crucial to ensure access to justice for survivors of domestic violence. Access to justice for women, girls and the LGBTI community, as well as the limited capacity of the justice system emerged as an important issue in the VNR consultation process.
The land and property law, approved in 2017, provides a modern legal framework for security of land ownership, but challenges exist in ensuring land ownership rights for vulnerable young women.  Young mothers, especially those who have been abandoned or have left their partner, and elderly widowed are very vulnerable. Women have lower ownership of land and often do not own the land they work. Some women can negotiate use of land with the owners, which is vital for them to invest in crops and cultivate their business ideas. (Tomak, 2016). The security of property rights can determine the willingness of Timorese women to increase their time and financial investment in agricultural production compared to other non-agricultural based livelihoods (Tomak, 2016). The land and property law is progressive in promoting formal guarantees of equality of rights and protection of vulnerable groups. The Parliament and the Government are working to ensure these rights are realised in practice. 
Leaving no one behind 
There has been a reduction in the proportion of young women aged 20–24 years who were married or in a union before the age 18, from 18.9 percent in 2009/2010 to 14.9 percent in 2016 (DHS 2009/10 and 2016). This rate is still quite high, and the Government has committed to ending child, early and forced marriage in line with target 5.3 of the SDGs. One-third (35.9 percent) of women aged 15-49 years feel that they make informed decisions regarding sexual relations, contraceptive use and reproductive health care (DHS, 2016). This may also be linked to the fact that the levels of illiteracy among young women aged 15-19 who had given birth were significantly higher (29.3 percent) than those who had never given birth (13.1 percent) (DHS, 2016). Investing in sexual reproductive health and rights education can help empower young women to make important choices about their education and life. 
The vocal LGBTI community in Timor-Leste demonstrates the country’s openness and leadership on LGBTI rights, particularly in the region. The political commitment to ensure non-discrimination of young people of different sexual orientations is important to make progress on leaving no one behind. Annual LGBTI Pride marches have been taking place in the capital since 2017. In 2017 the then Prime Minister Dr Rui Maria de Araujo made a public call on families and communities to accept LGBTI people and recognise everyone’s potential to contribute to Timor-Leste’s development. Timor-Leste has demonstrated leadership on LGBTI rights by sponsoring the 2011 UN Human Rights Council Joint Statement on Ending Acts of Violence Related Human Rights Violations Based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. It also accepted two recommendations on LGBTI rights made during the Universal Periodic Review by the UN Human Rights Council in 2016.
While there is little official national data on violence affecting the LGBTI community, qualitative research has demonstrated the discrimination facing this group continues to exist in education, workforce and family life. The VNR consultation with youth, highlighted the concern that existing legislation does not sufficiently incorporate the concerns of the LGBTI community. The Constitution does not list sexual orientation as prohibited grounds for discrimination. However, article 23 of the Constitution calls for all rights in the Constitution to be interpreted in line with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Although the Penal Code does not criminalise sex between consenting adults of the same sex, and it allows for a higher penalty if a person who commits a crime is motivated by discrimination on the grounds of “gender” or “sexual orientation”.

Data availability
The availability of data for SDG 5 indicators could be strengthened, with 
data available for 43 percent of indicators. There is currently a lack of 43% data relating to land ownership for women (5.a.1 and 5.a.2) or the legal framework to promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination on the basis of sex. There is also currently no time-use data 
available for unpaid domestic and care work (5.4.1).  There is good amount of data in relation to gender-based violence from Government and NGO surveys. This has played an important role in improving understanding of violence against women.

Achievements
Water and sanitation in Timor-Leste have improved markedly since the destruction of urban water infrastructure at the restoration of independence, with nearly a third (31 percent) of all households in the country having access to safely managed sanitation, compared to only 8 percent in 2010 (Census 2010 and 2015). This means households used an improved toilet facility that was not shared with another household, and where wastewater was safely disposed of. This level, however, is still very low and faster progress is required. Modest progress has also been made regarding access to safely managed and basic water supply since 2009/2010 (Census 2010 and 2015)20. While in 2009/2010 around 45 percent of households had access to safely managed or basic water sources, this proportion increased to 60 percent in 2015, an increase largely driven by the distribution of public taps across the country (Census 2010 and 2015) (see figure 24). It should be noted that the positive increase in water supply is mainly seen at the basic service level, which is not necessarily free from contamination. For water sources other than bottled water to be classified as safely managed, water quality testing is necessary.  
Key concepts: water
In 2015, there was a shift in how access to clean water and sanitation is assessed globally. For the Millennium Development Goals, water sources (as well as sanitation facilities) were simply categorised as either improved or unimproved. 
Improved water sources are sources that have the potential to deliver safe water, such as piped water, protected springs, and rainwater. Unimproved sources, on the other hand, include unprotected dug wells, springs or surface water. However, Sustainable Development Goal 6 uses an updated classification ‘ladder’ produced by WHO and UNICEF (2017a & b).
The 5 stages of the ladder range from safely managed at the top to surface water at the bottom.  A few conditions must be met for a water source to be considered safely managed, most importantly, water needs to be free from any contamination.
While improvements in some areas  Figure 24: Access to water supply of water and sanitation have been noticeable, improvements have not been universal across Timor-Leste and rural households have not benefited to the same extent as their urban counterparts. Communities and the Government in Timor-Leste recognise this and understand that investing in water and sanitation will create dividends in the form of improved nutrition, health and education outcomes for Timorese citizens. Working with women and girls to leverage better outcomes is also crucial. However, the scale of the effort need-

ed is significant. 
Communities and local Government have demonstrated a clear commitment to the Open Defecation Free (ODF) initiative with four Municipalities now free from open defecation. Eliminating open defecation is an important first step in making big improvements to sanitation and public health. Community led-total sanitation (CLTS) is an innovative methodology utilised in Timor-Leste as part of the Community Action Plan for Sanitation and Hygiene (PAKSI) to mobilise communities to completely eliminate open defecation. CLTS focuses on behavioural change and community mobilisation instead of hardware and shifts the focus from toilet construction for individual households to the creation of open defecation-free communities. There is growing recognition in Timor-Leste of the importance of behavioural change at family and community level for improving water quality, sanitation and hygiene, and this emerged clearly from a VNR consultation with women’s organisations. There is willingness from the community and Government to scale up the ODF initiative to all Sucos (villages), promote hand-washing practices, invest in water and sanitation in schools, and continue to promote de-worming among school children. Community-led water facility management groups, which have been formed to manage the construction, operation and maintenance of community water supply and sanitation infrastructure, have proven to be successful. 
Key concepts: sanitation
Like the water categories above, the classification of sanitation facilities has changed from the binary classification of improved and unimproved to the more refined sanitation ladder introduced by WHO and UNICEF. The ladder, with its five categories ranging from safely managed to open defecation, constitutes the new international standard to describe sanitation facilities (WHO & UNICEF, 2017a). 
The new categories constitute a paradigm shift; not only does it matter what type of toilet facility a household uses, but it is of equal importance how human waste is disposed of.



Challenges
One of the main challenges when assessing and monitoring water supply in the country is the lack of reliable data regarding water quality. Neither the latest 2015 Census nor the 2016 Demographic and Health Survey included any modules that involved water testing, a new requirement for the SDGs. In addition, the Ministry of Public Works currently does not have the capacity to test for water contamination at a nationally representative level. For progress on SDG 6 to be monitored correctly and to ensure the safety of drinking water from public taps, national water quality testing and regular monitoring is paramount, including in schools. A borehole might be an improved water source, but anecdotal evidence, especially from densely populated urban areas often reveals a contamination of the ground water, so that it becomes unsafe to drink.  In terms of strengthening data collection, it is also integral to improve education administrative data (EMIS) on water and sanitation in schools. It is necessary to go beyond simply recording the availability of WASH infrastructure and take account of the quality of WASH services provided for students and staff. 
Sufficient financial resources to implement water and sanitation urban masterplans and fund and resource the maintenance of rural infrastructure are issues that the country is still grappling with. It is understood by both communities and Government at different levels that investing in access to safely managed water and sanitation systems will create dividends in the form of improved nutrition, health and education outcomes for Timorese citizens. NGO and community-led behavioural change, hygiene and hand-washing initiatives are a core component in improving sanitation, however poor families may not be able to afford to upgrade their sanitation facilities and additional resources may be needed to further implement and expand the Community Action Plan for Sanitation and Hygiene (PAKSI). In relation to water, one of the biggest challenges to sustain and expand rural water services is the scale of funds required for operation and maintenance. Investments in rural water supply systems rely heavily on financing from development partners, and on Community Water Management Groups. External donor funding for urban water supply and sanitation sector has reduced in recent years (World Bank, 2018d), and sufficient resources are needed to fully implement and monitor masterplans for the rehabilitation of drainage, treatment centres, sewage and water systems in urban areas. Strengthening the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Public works in maintenance and monitoring will make an important contribution. 
Leaving no one behind
A greater effort is needed to mitigate the rural-urban divide as nearly a third of all rural households use surface water or water from an unimproved source as their main source of drinking water. In 2015 rural residents accounted for 92 percent of the 358,000 people nationally that do not have access to improved water supply and 86 percent of the 704,000 people nationally without access to an improved toilet (World Bank and IBRD, 2015).” While some progress has been made at the basic service level (an increase from 36 percent in 2009/2010 to 55 percent in 2015), nearly a third of households in rural areas (30 percent) are relying on either surface water or water from an unimproved source as their main source of drinking water (Census 2015)21.  In order to guarantee universal access to safely managed drinking water for all, regular water quality testing is required to ensure that water is not only available when needed, but also free from contamination.

The sanitation situation in rural areas is improving, but more than half of all rural households (52 percent) either practice open defecation or use an unimproved toilet facility such as an open pit or a shared public latrine (see figure 26) (Census 2015). Hygiene and sanitation are crucial factors for public health. The 2013 Timor-Leste Nutrition and Food Security survey (Ministry of Health, 2015) found that children in households with improved drinking water, improved latrines or hand-washing stations were less likely to be stunted than those in households in which these facilities were not available. Apart from the human cost of poor access to safe water and sanitation, there is also an economic case to be made: WHO calculated that globally for every US dollar spent on sanitation, there was a return of US$ 5.50 in lower health costs, more productivity, and fewer premature deaths (Hutton, 2012).
 	

Box 20: Quick wins: Water and sanitation in schools
Timor-Leste has made significant progress in improving water and sanitation in schools, with 70 percent of public basic education schools having an improved water source, (EMIS, MEJD 2016). Improving water and sanitation in all schools is a quick win that will make a considerable difference to ensuring healthy students that are ready to learn, particularly for girls.  Although many schools provide toilets, clean water and hand-washing facilities, many of these are not operational, with only 28 percent of schools having sufficient access every day (MEJD, 2018b).  As over half of schools take their water from community water supply systems, where water quality is not of good quality, improving access to clean water in schools is also an additional concern. In terms of sanitation, there were an estimated 83.9 students per toilet in 2015, which is double the minimum standard of 50. However, only 68 percent of these toilets were reported to be fully functional (EMIS, 2015). This makes the number of students per toilet even higher.  
The new water supply, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) strategy and costed action plan (2021-2025) for pre-schools and basic education spells out the minimum standards for WASH. It has all the components for improving access in schools and is an area where focused investment can make a big difference. In order to meet the minimum standard, the main need is for repair and rehabilitation, with some new facilities required. Due to the high number of poorly functioning facilities, the annual education budget will need to make sufficient provision for capital costs, ensuring schools are able to budget for recurrent costs for major maintenance and repairs. In relation to sanitation, about 12,000 toilets are needed for the minimum standard of 50 students per toilet cubicle including; separate toilets for male and for female students, a cubicle for girls for menstrual hygiene management, and a cubicle for students with physical disabilities (MEJD, 2018b). The MEJD estimates that overall, 9,000 new toilets are needed, with 2,700 existing toilets to be rehabilitated (MEJD, 2018b).  
In order to guarantee universal access to safely managed drinking water for all, regular water quality testing is required to ensure that water is not only available when needed, but also free from contamination. This will help improve data collection on SDG 6 and ensure it is easy to track progress and target investments by municipality in order to mitigate the rural-urban divide. Nearly a third of all rural households are using surface water or water from an unimproved source as their main source of drinking water, and more than half of all households either practice open defecation or use an unimproved toilet facility (Census, 2015). Both issues are a major public health concern, contributing to the spread of diseases, as well as to the severity and impact of malnutrition.  Improving access to clean water and sanitation will help the country make significant progress on tackling malnutrition and child health, but also improve learning outcomes and promote a healthy workforce (see figure 27). 
 	Figure 27:  Impact of improving water and sanitation on other outcomes

Data availability
Very little data on SDG6 is available, with data only available for 18 percent of indicators for SDG 6. The major issue in terms of data collec18% tion is the lack of national testing of water quality, which is necessary to meet the data requirements for the new classification ladders for water sources and sanitation facilities. There is also currently a lack of 
data on water infrastructure, water use efficiency, treated wastewater or levels of water stress. It is also important to strengthen and expand the data collected by the MEJD in EMIS (Education Management Information System) on both access and quality of water and sanitation in schools, at all levels. Improving data collection on water and sanitation within the education system will help improve planning and budgeting within the education sector. 
Achievements 
The economy has grown considerably in the past 20 years, although its pace has been decelerating (National Accounts). Real GDP per capita more than doubled between 2002 and 2016, although this has been largely due to the petroleum sector (National Accounts). The non-oil economic expansion was lower (at 35 percent) over the same period (National Accounts). Real GDP has been gradually declining since 2012 as petroleum reserves in the Joint Petroleum Development Area (JPDA) become depleted (National Accounts). Therefore, a better measure to reflect trends in domestic economic activity is non-oil GDP. Real non-oil GDP per capita declined by an average of 5.2 percent per year between 2002-2006, but subsequently recovered to a strong 8.4 percent growth rate in the 2007-2010 period (National Accounts). Between 2011 and 2016, per capita growth decelerated to about 2.4 percent (National Accounts). The economy contracted in 2017 due to the political impasse and a reduction in public spending. The economy is also expected to have contracted in 2018, with nonoil gross domestic product (GDP) estimated to have declined by 0.7 percent in 2018 (World Bank, 2019b). This was due to the economic and political uncertainty caused by the delay in approving the 2018 state budget, which was not passed until September 2018. However, the economy is expected to start recovering in 2019.  
Economic growth has been predominantly driven by public expenditure, which has provided a strong boost to the construction and public services sectors. Public spending has been a key driver of domestic economic activity since the restoration of independence. Economic performance has benefited from the growth of construction and public services, as the Government invested in re-building infrastructure, strengthening public institutions, and enhancing service delivery. Now that the country has emerged from a phase of post-conflict reconstruction, it is important to create sustainable and inclusive growth. The expansion of productive sectors – such as agriculture, agribusiness for food processing, labour-intensive manufacturing, and tourism – is central to diversify the non-oil economy (to mitigate the dependency on the petroleum sector) at national and municipal levels to generate decent employment opportunities. A more dynamic private sector will also be important to accelerate and sustain economic growth. 
The country has successfully saved and managed the proceeds of its natural oil and gas resources for future generations through its sovereign wealth Petroleum Fund. Among sovereign wealth funds, the Petroleum Fund scored 88 out of 100 in the 2017 Resource Governance Index ranking 6th out of 34 assessments (National Resource Governance Institute, 2017). This is a notable achievement for such a young country emerging from conflict. Timor-Leste is one of the first countries in the world to comply with the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI). It has presented annual national EITI reports since 2008. Oil and natural resources are an important resource for the economy. However, as Timor-Leste’s main income is derived from oil revenue, the oil and natural resources must be explored in a cost-effective way to ensure fiscal sustainability. The Timor-Leste Constitution mandates that exploitation of the country’s natural resources (including the oil reserves) should lend themselves to the establishment of mandatory financial reserves. The Government can only withdraw limited amounts to finance national strategic priorities of the General State Budget, according to Estimated Sustainable Income (ESI) targets set by the Parliament. While, the Petroleum Fund is necessary to fund the budget, it is important that there is prudent management of the fund in addition to increasing domestic revenue.
The country is in a strong financial position in the short and medium term to invest in human capital and promote economic diversification, but the quality of public spending matters. The Petroleum Fund holds considerable assets worth about $16 billion, which is more than 10 times the size of the 2019 state budget (National Accounts).  Although the Petroleum Fund balance remains relatively large, the level of public expenditure is very high and $10 billion has already been withdrawn from the Petroleum Fund since its inception (National Accounts). Government expenditures have risen sharply targeting the building and rehabilitation of economic and social infrastructure – such as electricity, roads, public buildings, schools and hospitals. Ensuring future withdrawals are used to invest strategically in the drivers of growth – such as human capital and economic diversification – will help achieve sustained economic growth. 
From 2010 to 2015, employment increased at a rate of 4.8 percent, creating 41,637 new jobs in the economy (Census 2015). The National Employment Strategy (2017-2030) provides an overarching policy framework of the Government and plays an integral role in improving efforts to generate jobs and improve productivity. Importantly, the gap between the female and male labour force participation rates has narrowed between 2010 and 2015 and this is across all age groups (Census Labour Force Report, 2015). The rise in female employment is in sectors that have grown substantially; health and education and most importantly in public administration. However, the labour force participation rate of women (35.8 percent) is still substantially lower than the rate of men (71.1 percent). While Timor-Leste has been able to create new jobs, this has largely been due to the expansion of the public sector with the bulk of current jobs in the informal sector. Agriculture provides direct employment for 64.2% of the workforce, followed by Government that provides employment for 13.5 percent of workers (Census 2015). Less and less people are absorbed in the agricultural sector, with numbers reducing by 15,000 between 2004 and 2015 (Census 2015 Labour Force Survey), suggesting a declining sector. Given its significant share of employment, growth in the agricultural sector could potentially absorb significant numbers of jobs every year. The Government estimates that 60,000 more jobs are needed per year to provide sufficient employment for the growing workforce in the next five years (Government Programme, 2019).  Timor-Leste will need to foster a private sector that can create sustainable jobs for its fast-growing working age population. 
Box 21: Community based bamboo value chain development for economic development and environmental conservation 
Bamboo is an important natural resource of Timor-Leste. It is a versatile and valuable plant with diverse applications including construction, furniture, handicrafts, animal fodder, paper and energy. It is also vital for soil and water conservation as well as disaster risk reduction. Timor-Leste has more than 10 species of bamboo, including one of the strongest species (D. asper), with potential to produce over 20 tons of bamboo wood per hectare. Bamboo has the potential to support the growth of rural communities by involving them in plantations, construction, handicrafts and scaffolding.  
The Bamboo Institute of Timor-Leste has recently established a community-based bamboo value chain system with a processing centre in Dili and 10 community pre-processing units in municipalities. It produces high quality bamboo furniture to supply the local market. The community processing centres have directly contributed to increasing the incomes of local farmers. In the Gleno Community Bamboo Centre, supported by development partners, this has generated good profits in less than 3 months since its establishment in March 2019. Although, there are positive developments in the bamboo sector, its potential has yet to be fully realised. The Government is implementing its recently developed National Bamboo Strategy and is focusing on increasing its resource base through plantation and sustainable management and diversifying its industrial applications.   
Internal migration and migration overseas are important dynamics in the Timorese economy enabling Timorese to gain higher education and seek employment opportunities. A cautious estimate of international migration is calculated as from 0.5 to 1 percent of the population leaving Timor-Leste each year (World Bank, 2018b). Over twothirds of overseas household members are working and around one third study abroad. Timor-Leste benefits from several international agreements that facilitate overseas work – in particular, the migrant worker programmes with Australia and South Korea. The Migration Governance Indicators (MGI)22 Framework 2019 of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) highlights the overseas worker programmes as positive examples of engaging with partners to address migration and employment concerns (IOM, 2019). Remittances are a source of income for one in five households, and receiving households tend not to be poor, (World Bank (2018a). In 2018, the country has received $91 million USD in remittance inflows, and $283 million of remittances were sent abroad (World Bank, 2019a). As many of these overseas opportunities are for unskilled labour, such as horticulture, there is potential to try to promote targeted opportunities for skilled labour. The majority (87 percent) of seasonal migrants are men (SEPFOPE, 2016), highlighting that at present these employment and education routes overseas do not appear to offer equal opportunities for men and women. 
Box 22: Youth on the move 
Internal migration within Timor-Leste is also an important route for employment and education. The 2015 Census reveals that a quarter (26 percent) of all the youth aged 15-24 living in urban Dili in 2015 had moved to the capital within the past 5 years, and 4,980 (or 8 percent) youth aged 15-24 had moved to Dili City in the last year alone. This decision to migrate has mostly been positive in terms of finding work. 62 percent of the young people who reported in the 2015 Census that they came to Dili City in the past 12 months for work were employed (Census, 2015). The unemployment rate of youth migrants is lower than the general unemployment rate of youth in Dili City (Census, 2015).
Challenges
There are currently not enough formal jobs to meet the large number of people entering the labour market. In 2013, 21.9 percent of youth aged 15-24 were unemployed (LFS, 2013); 25.3 percent of young men and 16.7 percent of young women. Young persons with a disability are also much more likely to be unemployed than youth without a disability (Census, 2015). Young people are concerned about jobs. This was a clear issue that emerged in the youth consultation for the VNR. The working age population is growing faster than the overall population, which presents great potential for a demographic dividend if fertility rates continue to decline. Timor-Leste is undergoing a process of demographic change. With mortality and birth rates both declining considerably, the share of the working-age population (those aged 15-64 years) in total population is increasing – it was around 55 percent in 2015 (World Bank, 2018b). In fact, the age dependency ratio started to decline in the early 2000s. This ratio is a measure of the economic burden that dependents (children and elderly) place on the working-age population. While Timor-Leste is at the early stages of a youth bulge, this increases the pressure on the education system and on the job market. In 2015, 20.3 percent of youth (15-24 years) were not in education, employment or training (NEET), 16.8 percent for males and 23.7 percent for females (Census 2015). It is therefore critical to generate decent employment opportunities for new entrants in the labour market and invest in education and skills.
Although the private sector is nascent in Timor-Leste it is not sufficient to generate enough jobs and drive new areas of economic growth. Micro and small enterprises (MSEs), which employ fewer than 10 people, dominate the small private sector. While MSEs account for two thirds of businesses, they only account for 27 percent of private sector employment (World Bank, 2018a). Economic diversification and creating new markets in the areas of agriculture and agribusiness for food processing, labour-intensive manufacturing, and tourism are key areas with significant potential for growth (World Bank, 2018b). Facilitating inclusive value chains that bring products to market will be important in order to reap the benefits of investing in agriculture agribusiness for food processing. The creation of special economic zones of Oé-Cusse and Ataúro are also aimed at stimulating regional development, since economic activity is currently centred in Dili (see box). In addition, supporting access to credit and connective infrastructure through ICT, aviation and targeted improvements to part of the road network will create a conductive business environment for private sector investment. The 2018 Doing Busi-



ness survey highlighted major weaknesses pertaining to enforcing contracts, registering property, and resolving insolvency but highlighted positive progress in terms of starting a business (World Bank, 2018e). It is integral to support growth of the private sector in strategic areas in order to promote employment generation. 
Box 23: Accelerating the SDGs at the local level: The Regional Strategic Plan for Oé-Cusse
The Special Administrative Region of Oé-Cusse (SAR Oé-Cusse) has developed a Special Zone of Social Market Economy (RAEOA-ZEESM) which aims to diversify the economy through inclusive and participatory socio-economic and environmentally sustainable development initiatives. RAEOA - ZEESM TL aims to serve as an incubator for sustainable policies that can be implemented in the geographical area covered by the Special Zone as well as other areas of Timor-Leste.
Five years into its creation, RAEOA - ZEESM has embarked on a new process to prepare a new regional strategic plan (RSP) for Oé-Cusse that will guide public investment for the next 5 years (2019-2023) and accelerate development. The development of the regional strategic plan aims to promote a common vision of the region while establishing priorities for future investment. The Plan summarises key needs identified and highlights the core ideas captured by communities during public consultation and prioritisation exercises. With the technical support of UNDP Timor-Leste, public consultations were held in 18 Sucos to gather views from men, women and children, and inform community members about the plan and future priorities. More than 400 community leaders participated in the consultation process, including representatives of women and young people, private sector and civil society.
The strategic plan covers five major pillars including the social sector, economic sector; infrastructure development, urban planning, governance and institutional modernisation. Clear goals, objectives and targets have been defined for each pillar with the aim of ensuring results-based management and alignment between the Oé-Cusse strategic plan and the Timor-Leste strategic development plan 2011-2030, national sectoral plans and annual action plans. In relation to the sequencing of the SDGs in the context of the RSP, Goals 1 to 11 and Goal 16 will be addressed in the next 5 years (2019–2023). Goals 12–15 will be addressed in the future as part of a subsequent medium-term planning framework.
With over 70 percent of the population engaged in agriculture (Census, 2015) and dependent on it for their livelihood, developing this sector could make an important contribution to economic growth. Agriculture, including fisheries and forestry, is the backbone of Timor-Leste’s non-oil economy, and the sector contributes to 17 percent of non-oil GDP (National Accounts). However, this is a reduction from 2008, when agriculture contributed 27.2 percent of non-oil GDP (National Accounts), highlighting that agriculture is a vital sector and has potential to reduce poverty, enhance food security, and thereby contribute to improved nutrition. For many countries in Asia, growth in the agricultural sector has played an important role in poverty reduction. Since poverty is concentrated in rural areas, raising farmers’ incomes can considerably improve living standards and rural-urban inequalities. However, currently the agricultural sector is losing workers, as young people move to urban areas for jobs, which is increasing pressure on the job market. This highlights the urgent need for private sector-driven job creation in the agricultural sector to retain workers. 
Timor-Leste is endowed with substantial agriculture potential and yet is a food-deficit country, importing approximately 40 percent of its annual staple food needs (National Food and Nutrition Security Policy, 2017). There is considerable potential for increasing the contribution of Timor-Leste’s agricultural sector. Of the 15,000 km land area, about 40 percent is suitable for crop and/or livestock and only about 80 percent of this arable land is currently being used (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, 2012). Agriculture productivity is low compared to neighbouring countries with similar agro-economies (World Bank, 2019a), and therefore there are major opportunities for rapid improvement at low cost. Farmers are keen to adopt new Climate Smart Agriculture technologies but face great challenges to market their cereal production. Developing value chains is essential, both for local and export markets. 
There are major business opportunities for enterprise/industrial development with the transformation of agricultural products, especially targeting substitution of imported products (snacks, biscuits, noodles, meat etc.). According to the World Bank (2019a), in addition to developing the coffee sector and vanilla industry, both important export commodities for Timor-Leste, forestry products such as high-value hard woods, candlenuts and coconut, spices, and legumes, are also export commodities that offer growth potential. The price of vanilla (fresh bean) at the farm gate is increasing significantly, from $7 per kilogram in 2015 to $57 per kilogram in 2018 (World Bank, 2019a). There is also renewed interest by the private sector to invest in value chain development of coffee (see box) and cassava (the latter for the brewing industry), demonstrating the commercial potential of agriculture.  Furthermore, aquaculture, horticulture, livestock and agro-forestry also show potential to increase productivity.  Encouraging the use of improved seeds, fertilisers and irrigation – supporting extension services and improving market access (through rural infrastructure) could help raise productivity levels and help support the emergence of a commercial agricultural sector. 
Box 24: Private sector trade association: revitalising the coffee sector 
The coffee sector in Timor-Leste is an interesting example of how partnerships between the private sector and farmers, in combination with political support, can foster improvements in agriculture. The coffee sector provides income for 20 percent of all households. However, low yields, poor quality, and missed opportunities for adding value all contribute to the high poverty levels among coffee-producing households. An average yield of coffee in Timor-Leste is around 10% of that of many other coffee producing countries23. In 2014, almost 50 percent of coffee-producing households had incomes below the national poverty line. There is clearly scope to increase incomes of coffee-producing households by improving yields of high quality coffee. It is estimated that if income from coffee could be doubled, the poverty rate among coffee households would drop from 50 percent to around 28 percent. 
While the coffee sector in Timor-Leste has long attracted large global companies, like Starbucks, the creation of the Timor Coffee trade association in 2016 played a pivotal role in revitalising the coffee sector. Notably this private sector association consists of members across the value chain, from large coffee exporters to roasters, traders, NGOs and small farmer groups. The association has promoted innovative initiatives such as Festival Kafe Timor, a barista competition, and a reality television show with baristas and farmers working together to improve the quality of coffee. The Timor Coffee Association helped develop the National Coffee Sector Development Plan (2019-2030) to promote the growth of the sector. The association is crucially also part of the private-public taskforce with the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries to implement the sector plan.  The plan has ambitious goals to double the production of coffee by 2030 and increase the value of exports of Timor-Leste coffee by 270 percent. While the coffee sector is a notable example of private sector working closely with farmers, improving production, productivity and quality will be crucial to realising the potential of this sector. 
Source of statistics: Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, (2019b), 
National Coffee Sector Development Plan 2019-2030, Dili: Timor-Leste
Tourism and other (modern) tradable services could also deliver significant new employment opportunities and productivity growth.  Tourism has the potential to generate significant direct and indirect employment opportunities – in accommodation, commerce, recreational activities, and transport services. Timor-Leste can be an attractive sustainable tourism destination for business meetings and niche holidays with unspoilt natural beauty, interesting history and a unique cultural heritage. The country is currently an early stage tourism destination with 74,000 foreign visitors in 2017 (World Bank, 2019c). In order to grow visitor numbers, continued investments in infrastructure are needed (airports, hotels and hotel rooms). It is estimated that for every 1 million spent on tourism spending, 200 jobs are created, 67 of those direct jobs (World Bank, 2019c). Tourism has the potential to generate significant amount of jobs, especially for women and youth, and could become a sustainable engine of growth. The importance of tourism for economic growth was raised in the consultation in the second city of Baucau for this VNR. In order for tourism to generate local employment, local workers need to have the appropriate skills. As many service activities require relatively high education and skill levels, continued support to basic education and TVET are required. Growth in sustainable tourism in Timor-Leste will continue to require efficient infrastructure, strong analysis of the tourism market and careful designing and planning.
Strengthening the efficiency, transparency and equity of public services (such as health and education) and reforming public administration can play a vital role in improving service delivery and poverty reduction. The Government of Timor-Leste plans to introduce e-Government services to improve service provision and make access to services easier for citizens. This will assist the programme for decentralisation and will enable the Government to better monitor the effectiveness and quality of services throughout the country. 
Leaving no one behind
In 2015, the unemployment rate among youth with disabilities was significantly higher (30 percent) among compared to youth with no disabilities (12 percent), though it decreased from 2010 (38 percent) (Census, 2015). According to the 2015 Census, persons with a disability are five times more likely to be unemployed than a person with no disability.  For those that do manage to secure employment, the challenges faced by persons with disabilities include concentration in low-level and low-paid jobs, problems of access to workplace areas, transportation; and the risk of losing benefits on starting work. Targeted investment in vocational training for persons with disabilities could be an important first step in supporting persons with disabilities to develop the right skills for the workforce. There is currently insufficient data on the labour market and persons with disabilities. Strengthening data collection and disaggregation on vulnerable groups will therefore make an important contribution to economic inclusion.  
Although women work predominantly in the agricultural sector, (56 percent of employed women), women only make up 26 percent of wage employment (employees) in agriculture (Census, 2015) (see figure 28). According to the 2019 World Bank gender poverty mapping study (World Bank, 2019d), the employment rate in Timor-Leste is highly gender-unequal across areas, with the employment rate of men significantly higher than that of women. In order for women to fully participate in the economy it is integral for women to engage in wage employment in a variety of sectors across the economy and to have access to credit and banking. 
 	 	 	Figure 28: Share of wage employment (employees), by sector, 2015

In 2015, men made up the majority of employees in the Government, state-owned en terprises and privately-owned business (see figure 29). Furthermore, only 11.1 percent of women have access to banking, compared to 15.6 percent of men, which is also low (DHS, 2016). This can prevent women from opening their own business, saving money and accessing credit.
 	 	Figure 29: Male and female share (%) of each sector of employment, 2015

Young women in agriculture are significantly more disadvantaged in terms of education and paid employment than young women who are non-farmers. Female farmers make up 21 percent of young women between the ages of 15-24 (Census, 2015), and 42 percent of these young women had at least one child versus only 12 percent of non-farmers (Census, 2015). Young female farmers were also less likely to be in school, 29.8 percent of female farmers had no formal education compared to 7.8 percent for young non-farming females (Census, 2015). Timor-Leste’s 2018-2023 Maubisse Declaration on Rural Women’s Empowerment calls for the implementation of gender equality policies, particularly within the agricultural industry to improve rural women’s lives. 
Data availability
Data is available for 40 percent of the indicators for SDG 8. Some of the indicators for this SDG are currently more relevant to developed 40% economies, such as domestic material consumption. Most of the other indicators could be collected through a regular Labour Force Survey. 
Currently the most recent survey was conducted 6 years ago in 2013 
and did not directly relate to the SDGs. In order to strengthen the data on persons with a disability in the labour force, as mentioned in SDG 4, the set of six questions related to disability from the internationally recognised UN Washington Group on Disability Statistics, should be integrated in the Census and Labour Force Survey. 
Achievements 
Progress made in health and education is in part due to infrastructure investments in roads, electricity, schools, and health facilities, which have contributed to improved access to, and quality of, public services. As a small mountainous island state, developing efficient connective infrastructure to move people, goods and information is crucial for economic growth and strengthening social capital. Timor-Leste’s stock of infrastructure assets was already deteriorating prior to the restoration of independence, with most roads, buildings and sewage systems destroyed in its aftermath. Almost 70 percent of the country’s physical assets were destroyed or unusable by 2000 (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015). Government expenditure on infrastructure assets increased from $33m in 2008 to $427m in 2012 (in nominal terms). Infrastructure spending, predominantly on electricity and road networks peaked in 2011 at US$534 million, nearly half of total expenditure and non-oil GDP (Ministry of Finance/ World Bank 2015). This is one of the highest rates of infrastructure spending in the world. Rebuilding Timor-Leste’s connective infrastructure and ensuring it is resilient and cost-effective is vital for improving all-weather access to markets and services for communities, and thus promoting economic and social inclusion.
An Infrastructure Fund was created to ensure all strategic investments are designed to increase economic growth and enhance social capital. The fund prioritises investments in key areas including basic and vital infrastructure, electricity, water supply, drainage and irrigation systems, and roads and bridges. In 2008, a road survey found that only 8 percent of core roads were in fair condition, with the remaining in poor (22 percent) or very poor condition (70 percent) (ADB, 2008). There has been significant investment by the Government and bilateral and multilateral development partners to upgrade and rehabilitate the national road network as part of national and rural roads master plans, ensuring expenditure on roads that will have the most economic impact. The Government allocated budget from its own funds as well as from concessional loan financing sources to upgrade the national and municipal capital road networks and the Dili urban road. Development partners, with government contribution to the fund, currently fund the upgrading of rural roads. The country is strengthening the six major national and regional road links, has rehabilitated important rural roads to meet minimum standards, linking municipal and sub-municipal centres and has developed a plan for a national highway ring road.  
Timor-Leste has a much lower rate of density of good condition paved roads than an average middle- or low-income country, highlighting that road rehabilitation is required as the country approaches middle income country status (Ministry of Finance/ World Bank, 2015). Completing the rehabilitation of the six roads prioritised under the SDP would lead to an equal rate of density of good condition paved roads to that of the average lower middle-income country (Ministry of Finance/World Bank, 2015). However, full rehabilitation of all existing roads to an international paved standard is not likely to be a necessary condition for the achievement of lower-or upper-middle income country status (Ministry of Finance/World Bank, 2015).  It may lead to a road network that is bigger than the country can maintain, or the size of the economy potentially requires. The road system is the most valuable non-resource related asset that the country owns and operates as a public good. According to an expenditure review on the infrastructure sector in Timor-Leste (Ministry of Finance/World Bank, 2015), well-planned maintenance and rehabilitation is the most important aspect for Timor-Leste’s road network in order to achieve all-weather accessible roads. There are notable challenges with project design, appraisal and implementation of capital projects. The IMF has recommended to strengthen the project appraisal process for infrastructure projects by developing a standard methodology for project appraisal and verifying that it is consistently applied by line ministries (IMF, 2017).
The Government of Timor-Leste has also made a significant investment in community infrastructure through the National Village Development Program (PNDS). This program aims to improve the living standards of citizens in rural areas by supporting men and women to plan, construct and manage small-scale infrastructure projects in their village based on their needs and priorities. Communities are allocated annual grants from the Government and supported to plan and implement projects by civil engineers, financial advisers and social development facilitators. In addition to increasing community employment, more than 1,300 basic infrastructure projects have been built or rehabilitated by communities, including health clinics, school classrooms, rural roads, water pumps and irrigation schemes (Secretariat for Promotion of Equality and Inclusion, 2019). This community-driven approach aims to address disparities in access to services and quality infrastructure in rural areas. This programme has also contributed to increasing women’s participation in local decision-making processes and the election of women to the position of Chief of Suco (Village) during recent village elections (Secretariat for Promotion of Equality and Inclusion, 2019)
The creation of an onshore oil and gas industry in the south coast is thought to be key to the development of a strong industrial sector in Timor-Leste. The Tasi Mane project in three coastal clusters will support the development of Timor-Leste’s petroleum industry, from its current extractive nature to a more diversified and higher value-added industry through onshore processing. This would be achieved through a Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) plant, a refinery, and a petrochemical industry hub. The investment in the south coast is also expected to spur the development of the region with the rehabilitation of regional airports, a new highway and other infrastructure. The ambitious Tasi Mane project requires a large up-front financial investment, while its socio-economic benefits may take longer to realise. Due to the nature of the oil sector, which is affected by strong fluctuations in demand prices, this is an investment with some risks. Attracting private investors is important to protect the petroleum fund and sustain economic growth. 
Timor-Leste has made impressive strides in improving access to electricity, with access doubling between 2010 and 2016 (DHS 2009/10 and 2016). In 2007, Timor-Leste had one of the lowest rates of access to electricity in the world – at 22 percent (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015). Since then, impressive progress has been achieved, with access rates doubling from 38.9 percent in 2009/2010 to 75.6 percent in 2016 (DHS 2016). The most marked increase was in rural areas, where access increased from 24.8 percent in 2009/2010 to 68.3 percent in 2016 (DHS 2009/10 and 2016). The Strategic Development Plan (SDP) made electricity a key objective for the first phase. By 2013, the rate of access had risen to an estimated 53 percent (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015), due to significant efforts of development partners and the Government to expand supply and improve the reliability of electricity. The National Electricity Grid is the largest ever infrastructure program in Timor-Leste. The National Electrification Programme increased generation capacity and connections through new power stations, transmission and distribution facilities, bringing electricity to citizens, health clinics and schools across the country. However, just over 15 percent of the population still do not have access to electricity and the system has the potential to be expanded (DHS, 2016). Figure 30: Access to electricity, urban and rural While, in 2016 nearly all (98 percent) urban households had access to electricity, only 66 percent of rural households had access (DHS, 2016) (see Figure 30).
From 2008 to 2013, 57 percent of total Government expenditure was utilised to develop the electricity sector (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015). The total investment in the sector, including building generators, the transmission grid, and 
the distribution network has been DHS 2009/10 DHS 2016 estimated at between $800 million 
and $1 billion (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015). Generators are currently running on diesel fuel, switching to heavy fuels or LNG could make potential fiscal savings. With increases in demand (and potentially international oil prices) this would increase the financial cost to the Government.  Fees and charges are quite low and could be increased to partly reduce the electricity subsidy. Continuing to invest in renewable energies and the enormous potential of solar power will play an important role not only in addressing the country’s energy needs, but also in helping Timor-Leste meet obligations under climate change conventions.
The manufacturing sector has grown strongly since 2014, albeit from a low base. This is partly due to investment by the international company Heineken setting up a production base in Timor-Leste. Manufacturing currently represents between 1-2 percent of total value added (National Accounts).  The sector recorded a large increase in workers between 2004 and 2015, although these are likely to be workers in informal low-productivity activities – such as small-scale traditional weaving and manufacturing (World Bank, 2018b). Due to the need to diversify the non-oil economy, investing in new labour-intensive industries by growing the manufacturing sector could yield significant benefits. The success of East Asian economies raising living standards over the past 50 years is underpinned by a strong manufacturing sector. Labour-intensive manufacturing processes have low skill requirements and can lead to significant job creation, particularly of women, due to their strong participation in the sector. Manufacturing is one of the four productive sectors prioritised by the Government, alongside tourism, oil and minerals and agriculture to help diversify and grow the non-oil economy. 
Challenges
Given the significant financial investment in road infrastructure and the scale of needs, improved monitoring of infrastructure projects and investment in road maintenance is required. Road maintenance is a key to maintain these assets and ensure their sustainability. Developing reliable, sustainable and resilient connective infrastructure will continue to be an important issue for Timor-Leste. The state of the country’s roads and water infrastructure are pressing concerns for citizens, with 27 percent stating in a public opinion survey that poor roads are the most important issue for Timor-Leste, with 22 percent believing that access to clean to clean water is the most pressing. 10 percent of respondents stated employment was the most important issue (International Republican Institute, 2018). Crucially, 38 percent of respondents felt that the state of roads got worse over the past 12 months.  According to the SDP, a lack of investment in road maintenance often results in the need for emergency repairs. Funds are often diverted from the operation and maintenance budget for emergency rehabilitation of roads, which is an expensive method of managing a road network. (Ministry of Finance/World Bank 2015). Conducting cost-benefit analysis and investing in ex-post evaluations will ensure lessons are learned about ensuring quality and maintenance. There is potential to establish a municipal-wide maintenance program, using community labour alongside contractors, to support local employment. Strengthening the institutional capacity of the infrastructure sector is integral for ensuring better planning, monitoring and inspection of projects in progress, and ultimately quality and sustainable infrastructure. 
Leaving no one behind
Introducing fibre optic cable connections, and thereby guaranteeing high-speed Internet access to all citizens at a reasonable price, is vital to becoming a dynamic economy and ensuring poor citizens do not get left behind, both globally, and in comparison, to wealthier citizens. Currently the proportion of individuals using the Internet is quite low, with only 26.8 percent of individuals using the Internet, 31.1 percent of men and only 22.4 percent of women (DHS, 2016).  The use of information and communications technology for the economic and social inclusion of women is also increasingly important in Timor-Leste. Impressive gains have been made in mobile phone coverage, with a significant number of women owning a mobile phone, 65.6 percent of women, (77.3 percent of men). In 2008, the SDP estimates that only 68 percent of the population lived within a signal range of mobile networks (Office of the Prime Minister, 2010). While mobile phone coverage has risen dramatically, only 2 percent of both men and women use a mobile phone for financial transactions (DHS, 2016).  Significantly increasing access to information and communications technology will make a big difference to sustaining improvements in health, education and economic growth. 



While there have been significant improvements in infrastructure in the education sector, 40 percent of students start primary education in schools that do not have sufficient classrooms for all grades (World Bank, 2018b). The lack of classrooms can lead to double and triple shifts in schools, reducing the school day for students (MEJD/ World Bank 2019). The absence of classrooms also causes an increase in the number of students per class, affecting the quality of education. According to analysis conducted by the MEJD and the World Bank (2019), to meet the demands of the education sector by the year 2030, 1871 public classrooms are needed, of which 130 are in pre-school education, 1573 in primary education and 168 in secondary education. More financing is required for the construction and renovation of schools and classrooms at all levels of education, from pre-school to secondary.  It is estimated that public school infrastructure will cost the Government about US$56.1 million by 2030, and by 2025 US$21.2 million will be needed to meet the demand for education in terms of classrooms (MEJD/World Bank 2019). There is also a need to address poor quality (and maintenance) of the existing infrastructure with a sufficient budget required for maintenance and rehabilitation of schools. Addressing over-crowding and the lack of school facilities in rural areas, may contribute to reducing student dropout and ensuring the poorest children attend, and stay, at school. 
Data availability
There is very little data available for SDG 9, with data only available for 17 percent of the indicators. A number of the indicators are designed 17% for more developed economies, including data on expenditure on research and development, and medium and high-tech industry value added. It may be possible to increase the data available by including questions relating to Business Activity Survey on the availability of loans and credit. 


At this critical state-building phase in Timor-Leste’s development, it is important to create new partnerships and carefully leverage external and domestic resources to finance sustainable development. New innovative forms of financing, technology, south-south cooperation and technical support that build the country’s institutional capacity are integral. Timor-Leste has successfully created a Petroleum Fund that is currently being used to finance public services. It is integral to ensure that public financing achieves a return on investment, through investing in areas 
that promote human capital and economic diversification. These areas include public infrastructure, nutrition, health, education, water and sanitation, job creation and gender equality. It is important to make the money work hard, and deliver better, to ensure each investment gets a good return. Timor-Leste is committed to harnessing dynamic (domestic and international) partnerships to accelerate progress on the SDGs. The resources, expertise and capacity needed to tackle important challenges, as well as maintain and accelerate progress, are significant.  
Mobilising resources for the SDGs
Overseas development assistance (ODA) has been declining in Timor-Leste, and with the revenues from oil production likely to decrease, the country is at a crucial moment in harnessing domestic and international resources. Timor-Leste has experienced roughly 12 percent downward trend in ODA per year since 2015 (Aid Transparency Portal). For the period 2011 until 2015 the country received over US$200 million in development assistance each year. By 2017 this has declined to US$176.6 million (Timor-Leste State Budget 2018) (See figure 31 and 32). This trend is expected to intensify in future, with planned development partner commitments falling possibly to $52m by 2021.24 While ODA was vital in supporting the reconstruction phase post-independence, financing on average 75 percent of Government expenditure between 2002 and 2006, in 2016 ODA was equivalent to 8 percent of GDP (including oil) (Aid Transparency Portal). Petroleum revenues currently finance the bulk of public expenditure. With revenues from oil production (from the Bayu-Undan field) expected to decrease significantly and possibly ceasing after 2023, the country is urgently seeking to develop the ‘non-oil economy’ so that revenue from non-oil sectors of the economy can adequately finance public services in future. While revenue streams from the Tasi Mane project are expected to come online when production starts in 2025 or 2026, this will require large upfront investments. 
 	  	Figure 31: Aid Disbursements 

The country is expected to be re-classified from ‘least developed country’ to ‘middle income country’ status in December 2021 (UN Committee for Development Policy, 2018). The graduation decision was deferred to 2012 as the Gross National Income (GNI), although significantly above the threshold, was not viewed as stable. In addition, the country’s position on the Human Assets Index was borderline on the threshold. The Human Assets Index is a composite index of health, nutrition and education indicators and is one of the criteria for ‘least developed country’ status. While this potential re-classification recognises the success of the country in managing its development, it will also bring additional new challenges for Timor-Leste including the prospect of automatically triggering a reduction in development assistance and the country’s ability to attract concessional financing. Timor-Leste has already begun to develop its plans for managing this transition, as many donors will change the nature of their international assistance to the country after 2021. 
 	Figure 32: Overseas Development Assistance for key sectors 

Recognising the importance of domestic revenue mobilisation for reducing the dependence on oil revenues to finance public services, several key fiscal reforms are underway.  In line with the Addis Agenda on financing for development, Timor-Leste established a Fiscal Reform Commission to strengthen the country’s tax systems to mobilise domestic resources and ensure fiscal sustainability. The commission conducted three key initiatives. Firstly, underpinned by the draft tax and duties law under revision, the proposed introduction of Value-Added Tax (VAT) could potentially make an important contribution to raising revenue through taxation.  However, even with some exemptions, the burden on the poorest will need to be considered. In 2017 domestic revenues (including tax and non-tax revenues) made up a small part of overall resources, consisting of 13.5 percent of GDP (National Accounts).  The introduction of the VAT has the potential to support business and contribute to increasing non-oil domestic revenues. Secondly, reforming fees and charges is one of the key pillars of the fiscal reform programme. Thirdly, customs reform will improve the efficiency and transparency of customs systems will facilitate improvements in the collection of Government revenue in fair and transparent ways. Notably, almost 65 percent of respondents in a public opinion survey in 2018 stated that they would be prepared to pay higher taxes to receive better services (The Asia Foundation, 2018). 
In order to assess the financing needed to implement the Strategic Development Plan, the Government of Timor-Leste initiated a development finance assessment (Ministry of Finance, 2018). It recommended priority reforms to the Government’s financing framework and identified ways to strengthen private sector investment. This assessment is one of the first among g7+ countries and can inform financing assessments for other g7+ members in the future.  One of the key recommendations of the assessment is for the country to develop an integrated financing strategy. This would involve estimating the scale of investments required in public and private financing and form a basis for targets for mobilising resources for the SDP. It could also provide guidance for improving alignment between budgets, policies and the SDP objectives. The strategy could act as a bridge between the SDP and short and medium-term financing policies. The development finance assessment also recommends developing an investment promotion initiative that focuses increasing investment in key industries. In relation to overseas development assistance, the assessment recommends mobilising new sources of financing to fund specific social programmes Finally, the assessment identifies ways to build stronger partnerships in relation to the SDP through establishing regular multi-stakeholder forums on the SDP, including regular dialogue with the private sector. 
Partnerships
As a small island state dependent on trade, albeit with increasing trade capacity, potential accession to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) could help contribute the SDGs.  The main domestic export, outside oil and gas, is coffee, and the country is looking to scale up small existing markets and grow new niche markets for quality agricultural produce (e.g. coffee and vanilla) (Government Programme, 2019). As Timor-Leste already has a very low and uniform tariff (2.5 percent) with very few exceptions and no stated quotas, joining the WTO and ASEAN can guarantee Timor-Leste market access and contribute to growing exports, particularly in Asia. Almost 40 percent of Timor-Leste’s total trade in goods was with Indonesia between 2012 and 2014, with Singapore, China and Vietnam making up a further 30 percent of trade (World Bank, 2018a). According to the World Bank (2018a) accessing even a small fraction of ‘niche’ external markets could be transformational for a small country like Timor-Leste and improve the livelihoods of Timorese people. The innovative Single Window Customs Portal the country is developing will help create a modern and professional Customs Authority and improve trade facilitation and revenue collection. The customs and tax reforms taking place will enable Timor-Leste to economically integrate with ASEAN member states and the other regional countries that have trading agreements with ASEAN.
Identifying new opportunities for private sector investment for development will become increasingly important. The country has made some gains in reducing barriers to doing business, including making it easier to start a business and pay taxes, but many obstacles still exist. Timor-Leste is interested to learn from the experience of other countries and implement new innovative financing mechanisms, such as the issuance of ‘climate, development and diaspora bonds’ that can help unlock additional financing that will be required to progress the SDGs. Encouraging high-net worth individuals to invest in the development of Timor-Leste and supporting the role of philanthropic foundations in financing SDGs could be additional ways of attracting finance.  Utilising remittance flows to support the country’s transition to ‘Middle Income’ status is another element that will need to be considered. The need for regular dialogue with the private sector on the SDGs to address how businesses can play a bigger role in financing development and offering innovative solutions to protracted issues will be integral. 
Maximising support from multilaterals, including the Asian Development Bank, European Union, World Bank, and the United Nations will be important in maintaining sufficient levels finance for the SDGs. Working closely with multilateral agencies, and capitalising on their support, will be crucial to aid the transition from ‘least developed country’ to ‘middle income country’ status. Multilateral agencies will play an important role in supporting Timor-Leste to develop exit strategies and mobilise resources. The United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) is significant as it is the first time since the restoration of independence in 2002, that the UN system is focused solely on sustainable development and supporting the Government with its national plan without the presence of a peacekeeping or political mission. A new UNDAF will start in 2020 and will place Agenda 2030 at the centre. A new steering committee has been established to enhance coordination with the UN Country Team through the Resident Coordinator system. This will strengthen coordination between the UN and other key development multilateral and bilateral partners. 
Working more closely with bilateral partners (especially Australia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, New Zealand, Portugal, USA and other CPLP countries) will be integral to implement the SDGs and the Strategic Development Plan. Their role in the reconstruction phase of Timor-Leste has been crucial, supporting areas such as infrastructure, training for the armed forces and the police, and training teachers. They will continue to play an even more important role in supporting the country in its state-building efforts to build capable institutions, invest in human capital and promote inclusive and sustainable growth. Bilateral partners in the region, such as Indonesia, are important for the country’s trade, promoting tourism and jobs and access to higher education. However, neighbours in the region also have a vital role to play in managing oceans, ensuring security and working together to combat people smuggling. Timor-Leste’s cooperation with development partners as part of the Development Partners Unit in the Ministry of Finance is a useful way of strengthening harmonisation and alignment of overseas development assistance and support to country systems. 
Identifying new forms of South-South cooperation and ‘people to people’ exchanges can be fruitful in promoting sharing of lessons critical to Agenda 2030. The g7+ intergovernmental group of conflict-affected countries has proven to be a rich partnership, promoting joint advocacy, cooperation and lesson learning for Agenda 2030.  It is an excellent example of south-south cooperation that has amplified the voice of fragile countries on the international stage. The New Deal for Engagement in Fragile states is an important framework negotiated by g7+ countries to set out new aid effectiveness principles for engaging in fragile situations. The crux of this framework is to support country-led state-building goals and mutual accountability underpinned by country-led partnerships. Timor-Leste recommits itself to showing leadership within the g7+ on SDG 16, working to enhancing south-south cooperation, and accountable and country-led development.
Box 25: Government-Civil Society partnership for improving accountability and feedback loops in service delivery: The role of the Social Audit initiative 
In February 2015, the Government launched a social audit initiative in partnership with the NGO Forum of Timor-Leste, FONGTIL, enabling civil society to monitor investments in local services. The program aims to strengthen accountability to citizens and to improve the responsiveness of service providers. The crux of this programme is to strengthen feedback loops between community, local leadership and local Government who develop joint action plans to improve the quality of services. A dedicated Social Audit Unit in the Prime Minister’s Office coordinates this initiative in partnership with FONGTIL.
As a small island, vulnerable to natural and climate hazards, climate change will impact all coastal communities and key sectors such as agriculture. Climate-proofing investments and infrastructure and promoting climate adaption are central for environmental sustainability and resilience. Timor-Leste believes global action to combat climate change and new partnerships are required to support the leadership shown by small island states in areas such as renewable energy (i.e. solar power) and water resources management.
Implementing and monitoring the SDGs
Strengthening the link between planning and budgeting is vital to enhance delivery of the SDP and to fulfil Timor-Leste’s commitment to the 2030 Agenda.  Several important initiatives are underway to support new multi-year, results-focused planning and budgeting processes that provide citizens and decision-makers at all levels with clear information on national priorities, plans and expenditures. These budgetary reforms will enable quarterly and annual performance monitoring against the SDP and permit analysis of the alignment of Government plans to the SDP. A budgetary governance roadmap, developed in 2017, with support from the Organization for Economic Cooperation (OECD) to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of budgeting, is an integral building block in supporting implementation of the SDGs. More efficient budgeting will also improve the effectiveness of Government resources and reduce the need to finance development from withdrawals from the oil fund. Crucially, the budgetary governance roadmap is part of broader public administration and public financial and fiscal reform. An inter-ministerial council, chaired by the Prime Minister, will oversee the reform.  
The introduction of programme budgeting across all Government ministries and agencies, as part of public financial management reform, has allowed the alignment of Government programmes to the SDG goals. As part of the continued reform of program budgeting, the Government is currently reviewing all programme outcome indicators to ensure alignment with the SDG indicators. This exercise, when completed, will result in the nationalisation of the SDG indicators and support the monitoring and evaluation of SDG results from 2020 onwards.  Further work will be undertaken with line ministries and autonomous agencies to ensure that their sectoral medium-term plans also reflect the nationalised SDG indicators. The planned decentralisation of services to municipalities will also strengthen the capacity for programme budgeting and medium-term planning at the municipal and local levels. Through promoting 5-year plans and expenditure frameworks this will support the implementation and crucial costing of commitments in the SDP, and thereby the SDGs.
Box 26: Innovation in budget monitoring for the SDGs – Dalan Ba Futuru (Road to the Future)
Dalan Ba Futuru is an innovative new Government planning, monitoring and evaluation web-based information system. It was rolled out in 2018 for use in the 2019 budget and planning process. Each ministry, public agency and municipality will have, by the time it is completed, access to the system to prepare their annual and multi-year plans, monitor their performance and track progress against targets. Dalan Ba Futuru will provide performance information matched against budget and actual expenditure, which is vital in monitoring progress against the Strategic Development Plan and the SDGs.
The transparency monitoring dashboard is designed to promote transparency of the national budget and will be accessible to all citizens of Timor-Leste and all stakeholders. In future, as the system is further enhanced, the National Parliament will have access to Government plans and targets during budget debates. The Audit Court will also have access to actual results to undertake performance audits.  Interestingly, as it was built by the Government and is owned by the State, it has no licence or ongoing fees.  
Technical support for effective implementation of the SDGs
Several key steps have been taken to identify capacity development and technical support needs in order to address the key challenges outlined in this report. These areas include data and statistics, technical expertise, making better use of science and technology and strengthening institutional capacity. The SDG Roadmap produced in 2017 was a key initiative to assess the institutional capacity to implement the 2030 agenda. The process for developing this VNR has highlighted key areas where additional support is needed and where innovation and new partnerships are required. Timor-Leste is keen to learn from other countries that have overcome some of the obstacles the country is still grappling with. These include countries that have improved the capacity and reach of their justice sector and strengthened the quality of learning and teaching, while also dealing with the issues of multiple national languages. It also includes learning from other nations that have managed to combine the right mix of policies and interventions to reap a demographic dividend. Timor-Leste needs to generate significant number of decent jobs for growing number of young men and women entering the workforce and would benefit from hearing about how other countries have generated employment for men and women in productive sectors. 
The country is already part of several international exchanges established to learn from good practice in other countries (i.e. vaccination programmes in Sri Lanka). In order to main progress on the SDGs and accelerate in areas that are most challenging, new innovative forms of partnership and financing (domestic and external) are required. In addition, technical support which helps the country build its institutional capacity as part of its process of state-building is necessary. In line with the Addis agenda and the New Deal, Timor-Leste is keen for technical support, partnerships and investment that support the country’s priorities and utilise the country’s systems.
Significantly increasing access to information and communications technology will make a big difference to sustaining improvements in health, education and economic growth. The MEJD is already planning to improve the way the Ministry manages and uses data through introducing systematic improvements using information technology. The Government is also engaging innovative technology to address gender-based violence and improve service delivery to victims. While impressive gains have been made in mobile phone coverage, very few men and women use a mobile phone for financial transactions and the proportion of individuals using the Internet is still quite low. There is significant potential for innovative sources of financing and partnerships to enable Timor-Leste to leapfrog issues that other countries have faced in regard to new and emerging technology and taking advantage of technology to promote the economic and social inclusion for all. 
Data collection and analysis and leaving no one behind 
While improvements in national statistical capacity have been made, producing and analysing accurate and timely data for national reporting on SDGs can be difficult. Strengthening capacity and increasing resources for statistics is crucial to produce relevant and reliable statistics that can provide evidence for decision-making and policy development.  Quality data is also vital for making future projections that  are necessary for Government planning. Improving collection of anthropometric data on child nutrition, data on education quality and learning outcomes, and nationally representative data on water quality testing and sanitation will help monitor progress in human development. Efforts has been made to disaggregate data, however more investment is needed to ensure all survey data can be disaggregated by income, gender, age, migratory status, disability, social groupings and geographic location and other grounds based on which discrimination is prohibited. In the spirit of leaving no one behind, it is important to know as much as possible about key vulnerable groups, to understand who has benefited from certain interventions, and who has not, and to identify key blockages. The disaggregation of data should not just apply to Census and DHS surveys, but to all national surveys. It is important to continue integrating the recommendations from the UN Washington Group on Disability Statistics. The forthcoming Census and Agricultural Census is an excellent opportunity to collect data for SDG indicators, particularly in the area of food security and agriculture where there is currently little data.
A mapping of available data in Timor-Leste was conducted (see figure 33) for the purpose of the VNR, which highlights the key challenges in data collection, particularly for some of the focus SDGs. For an increasing number of SDGs (for example, SDG 16 and 17), the necessary information is not collected in national surveys. In order to bridge data gaps in relation to SDG 16, a priority SDG for Timor-Leste, new surveys and forms of qualitative and quantitative data collection will be required. Improving data access and quality on peace, justice and strong institutions is important to ensure progress on SDG 16 is carefully monitored.  Stronger efforts are needed to regularly access and combine administrative data from line ministries and service providers (e.g. number of qualified teachers, or unsentenced detainees for example). Collection of data on water and sanitation (especially water quality testing at a nationally representative level) is integral in order to be able to track progress in this priority area
In order to ensure no one is left behind, in the future it may be important to collect data with more frequency and geographical coverage than current surveys. Currently the DHS and Census are carried out every 5 to 10 years. Surveys may need to be conducted with enhanced mapping of geographic areas to fully understand the situation of vulnerable groups. In order to have as much data as possible, it is important to ensure regular that the Labour Force Survey, the Household Income and Expenditure, and the Household Consumption Surveys are carried out more with more frequency. The possible introduction of a Crime Survey and an Education Survey might also be useful. Strengthening and resourcing capacity in statistics is crucial not only to report data against the SDG Indicators but also to produce relevant, quality and timely statistics that can provide evidence for national decision-making and policy.
Data availability
Data collection on SDG 17 is challenging, with only 21 percent of the data available for indicators for this SDG. At present, some data on the 21% financial and economic indicators such as foreign direct investment are not available. In addition, there is no current data on the dollar value of financial and technical assistance. The aid transparency portal, however, is a useful tool for accessing and analysing information on development assistance. 



NEXT STEPS
Timor-Leste’s VNR process has increased citizen engagement and understanding about the SDGs. It has also reinvigorated discussion about financing and accelerating progress on sustainable development in the country. Recognising the importance of sustaining achievements and monitoring further progress, 5 key steps are planned to accelerate implementation of the 2030 Agenda. 
1. Increasing public understanding and encouraging active participation of citizens in implementing the SDGs is vital for accelerating progress. This will involve innovative new multi-sectoral and multi-institutional partnerships are needed to fast-track efforts on the SDGs. With the support of the SDGs Working Group, the Government plans to organise briefings and consultations on sustainable development and the VNR in the 13 municipalities of Timor-Leste and support enhanced media reporting on the SDGs. Due to the key role played by youth in achieving the SDGs, consultations with universities will be a priority. One of the first consultations to take place will be in November 2019 as Timor-Leste hosts the 2019 Annual Global showcase on SDG 16, as part of the 16+ Forum. This event will enable the country to share and learn lessons on promoting peaceful, just and inclusive societies. An SDG-private sector forum shall be established to support their participation in the United Nations (UN) Global Compact on corporate sustainability. Engaging in the UN Global Compact will support the private sector to play a bigger role in the implementation and financing of the SDGs. The VNR report has been translated into Tetun and Portuguese, the two official languages of the country, and will be circulated for wide dissemination.
2. Integrating the SDGs into Government budgeting, policies and programmes of line ministries is a key priority for the Government of Timor-Leste. As the Government moves towards medium term planning and expenditure frameworks, this will enable the costing of Government programmes and the SDGs over the medium term. The programme budgeting reforms are supporting the alignment of Government programmes to the SDG goals and indicators. The decentralisation of services to municipalities will also strengthen medium-term planning at the municipal and local levels. The Government is planning to develop a national framework of indicators and key statistical data/markers across all SDGs. This nationalisation of the SDG indicators will help ensure that sector plans of line ministries and autonomous agencies are aligned to the SDGs. The 2020 Budget Preparations are being organised with consideration to the potential impact on the implementation of the SDGs. This will assist in setting priorities, prioritising new initiatives and preparing budget documentation. In future, it is planned the Budget Books will not only identify where Government programmes contribute to the SDGs but will also highlight where support from development partners aligns to the goals. This will enable the Gov-


ernment, development partners and other stakeholders to identify the total commitment of resources to each SDG. The annual Timor-Leste Development Partners Meeting (TLDPM) is an important platform for partnership on the SDGs and deepening coordination on financing for development. 
3. While the Government has made progress in aligning budgeting and planning systems to the SDGs, there is significant work to do to enhance strengthen government capacity for data collection, analysis and monitoring. Ensuring reliable, timely and accurate data is crucial for evidence-based decision-making, planning for sustainable development, and the implementation of the Strategic Development Plan. Improved access to quality data will underpin future VNRs and support annual updates on progress to ECOSOC and the High-Level Political Forum on SDGs. A consultation on data collection will be organised to identify priority indicators for monitoring and analysis. It will estimate the cost and capacity requirements of data gathering on key indicators for priority SDGs, especially where there is currently little reliable data. The consultation will also help establish key priorities for data collection and develop a timeline for this work.   
4. The government will consider piloting an integrated mechanism for national reporting to the various bodies of the UN. This could include future VNR reporting, but also reporting on the implementation of human rights treaties and other UN treaties and conventions. This integrated national mechanism could also play a role in supporting the follow up of recommendations made as part of the UN review processes, to ensure maximum impact of the reporting efforts. This would require technical support from the UN system and from other interested development partners, including for capacity building of those who will participate in this national mechanism.   
5. Timor-Leste will advocate for a global approach and political will to mobilise resources for sustainable development. The country will seek targeted support from the international community as the country transitions from ‘least developed country’ to ‘middle income country’ status. The criteria for assessing the status of Least Developed Country (LDC), including economic vulnerability and human capital, are aligned closely with the SDGs. The country is keen to obtain support in developing exit strategies in relation to LDC graduation and attracting sufficient levels of financing from development partners and the private sector as it seeks to accelerate progress on the SDGs.




CONCLUSIONS
As this nation marks 17 years since the restoration of independence, developing Timor-Leste’s first Voluntary National Review has been a valuable process. It has been an important opportunity to take stock of the country’s progress on sustainable development, providing space to reflect on what is working and areas where progress is lagging. Through consultations with a wide range of stakeholders and analysis of data, the VNR has identified areas where additional funding and urgent attention is needed to ensure ’no one is left behind’, but also areas where sustained effort will be required to maintain progress. In a short period of time, securing peace has enabled this young country to make important gains. Yielding a continued peace dividend and consolidating and extending progress on inclusive development will be an important challenge for the country. 
The Voluntary National Review identified four main areas to fasttrack progress on the SDP in order to achieve the SDGs. Building human capital and promoting sustainable growth are vital pillars but they will not be possible without consolidating peace and addressing municipal and rural-urban disparities. This will require strengthening institutional capacity and prioritising and resourcing inclusive interventions to target the furthest behind first. This will also necessitate improvements in data collection and analysis in order to know who has benefited from certain interventions, and who has not, and to identify and address the key problems. Timor-Leste is keen to learn from other countries that have overcome some of the obstacles the nation is still grappling with.  Therefore, at this critical phase in its development, the country wants to make the most of technical expertise and expand partnerships to leverage domestic and international resources to finance inclusive and sustainable development.
One vital lesson that has emerged from the process of developing the country’s first Voluntary National Review is the centrality of strengthening existing and new partnerships to address the scale of challenge to implement Agenda 2030. The government is keen to engage all parts of government, key national institutions, civil society, private sector, communities and development partners in accelerating progress on the SDGs and the implementation of the Strategic Development Plan. Timor-Leste will continue to show leadership on the SDGs in order to ensure that the country has the right policies and plans to reap the peace dividend and ‘leave no one behind’.  

