1. Introduction 	 
 
Vanuatu 2030 The Peoples Plan (The Plan) is the National Sustainable Development Plan (NSDP) for the period 2016 to 2030.   The NSDP builds on the progress made and lessons learned under the Priorities and Action Agenda, which guided our national development efforts between 2006 and 2015, and the Millennium Development Goals, which also expired in 2015. 
 
The design of the NSDP reflects the unique identity of the Ni-Vanuatu people.  Vanuatu is a country of 83 islands located in the middle of the “Pacific Ring of Fire” and directly in the centre of the Pacific cyclone belt, making it one of the most “at risk” countries for environmental disaster in the world.  The vulnerability of Vanuatu is most evident in the past few years.  On 13 March 2015, Tropical Cyclone Pam struck Vanuatu, affecting 195,000 people and causing loss and damage equivalent to 64 per cent of annual Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The provinces most affected were SHEFA, which includes the capital Port Vila, and TAFEA.  This was followed by the evacuation of 12,000 people from the island of Ambae due to volcanic eruption.   
 
The design of the NSDP recognized that these 83 islands are home to over 1,000 languages and dialects.  Additionally, the NSDP design considered that Vanuatu has a Human Development Index (HDI) of 138 of 188, a population that is 83% rural based, and has an economy dependent on a narrow range of productive sectors that are vulnerable to external shocks.   All of these unique elements that make up the fabric of Vanuatu were discussed and reviewed over the two-year design period of the NSDP. 
 
It is the values and spirit of Ni-Vanuatu people that infuses and guides the implementation of the NSDP and the aligned SDGs.  Vanuatu was founded on Melanesian values of respect, harmony, unity and forgiveness. These values shape our cultural heritage, which is our strength. They are expressed through our oral traditions, languages, performing arts, social practices, rituals, festive events, traditional knowledge, and our deep connections with our ancestors, land and place, as well as the skills to be productive with our natural resources. Our development must be firmly anchored to these values that hold our society together. 
 
Community, family and kinship ties serve as the primary social safety net, especially for the young, the elderly, people with disabilities and other vulnerable people. We must ensure no one is disenfranchised from these traditional safety nets, while also enabling the state to fulfil its core responsibility to protect and deliver essential services to its population. The indivisible connections between culture and the social, environmental and economic pillars of the NSDP are reflected in our aspirations, and how we will deliver our national vision. 
 
A stable, sustainable and prosperous Vanuatu 
 
This value system is further evident in how we approached the recovery from Cyclone PAM (2015) and our relief efforts addressing the eruption of Manaro on Ambae (2016). Our Melanesian values make us resilient and willing to do everything that is necessary to secure our own and our children’s futures.  It is this resilience that will guides us through the implementation of the NSDP through 2030.  
 
The NSDP charts the country's vision and overarching policy framework for achieving a prosperous Vanuatu within the next fifteen years. In doing so, it sets out the national priorities and context for the implementation of the new global Sustainable Development Goals over the same period by aligning our National Vision with the Sustainable Development Goals and the Pacific Roadmap for Sustainable Development. The government is committed to implementation and monitoring, and to reporting on progress of both the NSDP and the SDGs that are aligned within our National Framework. Our societal values, economic development and environmental situation were all considered in designing an NSDP with a focus on culture to coordinate the social, economic and environmental pillars of development.  
 
 
 
 
The Annual Development Report (ADR) produced annually by the office of Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) in The Department of Strategic Planning Policy and Aid Coordination (DSPPAC) provides an annual update on the progress of the NSDP.  The ADR provides a high-level view of the status of the 15 NSDP Goals. The ADR provides the information on where the NSDP is at any given time (and over time) relative to respective targets of the NSDP Policy Objectives.  Ministry level information on the SDGs is linked to the NSDP through the planning process as described in the National Planning Framework (NPF). The NPF, the National M&E Policy and the NSDP M&E Framework work in coordination to:  
• Align the implementation of the NSDP and accompanying M&E framework. 
• Account for the alignment and localisation of the Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
Through the NSDP and the ADR Vanuatu is able to illustrate and evaluate the linkages between the SDGs and planning, policies and resources applied to supporting the delivery of services to the people1. 
 
The ADR provides the status of all three pillars of the NSDP; “Economic Pillar, Society Pillar, and Environment Pillar through the 15 Goals, 98 Policy Objectives, 196 subjective indicators and 205 targets in the NSDP M&E Framework.  Included in these NSDP targets and indicators are the aligned SDG indicators for the respective NSDP Policy Objectives.     
  
This format provides insight into how Vanuatu has integrated the SDGs into the ongoing work of implementing the NSDP and also provides a summative overview of the current status of each SDG. 
 
 
 
 

2. Highlights  
 
Progress has been made despite challenges confronting the continued sustainable development in Vanuatu.  Vanuatu is considered a Small Island Developing State (SID) and faces the ongoing challenges including geographically small size and remoteness, a narrow resource and export base, and high vulnerability to global environmental challenges and external economic shocks. Some of these have been evident in recent years by the impact of Cyclone PAM and the volcanic eruption on Ambae.   
 
Vanuatu embraces the Theme for 2019 of "Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality" through The People’s Plan and the integration of the SDGs throughout the plan.   Vanuatu is proud to be the first Pacific State to develop a National Implementation Plan for the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) recommendations. This plan informed the Government’s commitment to implementing key recommendations accepted at the second cycle. Furthermore, Vanuatu is one of the few countries to establish a National Human Rights Committee by Regulation (Order 105 of 2014) under the Government Act (No.5 of 1998).  Other Legislation, policies and tools include: 
• The Decentralisation Act and the Decentralisation Policy 2017-2027 
• Vanuatu Primary Producers Association Bill 
• National Gender Equality Policy 2015-2019 
• Justice and Policing Infrastructure Priorities Plan 
• The National Aid Management Policy (2019) 
• The National Monitoring and Evaluation Policy (2018) 
• The National Planning Framework (2018) 
• National Disability Inclusive Development Policy 2018-2025 
 
 Additionally, Vanuatu aligns specific plans and initiatives regarding the SDGs highlighted in 2019. 
 
SDG 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all Vanuatu’s National Sector Development Plan mandates that every child, regardless of gender, location, education needs, or circumstances must be able to access the education system.   The Universal Primary Education Policy (UPE) provides free education and the right to access education for Classes 1–6. Moreover, to address the issue of illiteracy, the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) developed a language policy and revised the curriculum to include vernacular as a language of instruction for early grade.  
 
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
The Market for Change initiative was brought about by a joint cooperation between the Government, the Municipal Councils and the UN Women. The main objective for the Market for Change is for the economic empowerment for women who sell food products at our local markets.  
 
SDG 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries 
In line with its national development priorities and commitment under the NSDP, the Government has worked towards equitable development across the country to ensure better access and people development. The Decentralization Act and the implementation of a Decentralisation Policy 2017-2027 brings Government closer to the people by providing citizens with greater control over decision-making process and allowing their direct participation in public service delivery. The Policy’s core objectives include: devolving decision-making authority, functions and resources in order to improve efficiency and effectiveness in the delivery of services; design and implement mechanisms to ensure a “bottom up” flow of integrated development planning and budgeting from the Area Councils (ACs) to the National Government; and enhance political and administrative authority in order to effectively and efficiently deliver services to the lowest level. 
 
 
SDG Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
The National Policy on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction 2016 – 2030, provides the framework to ensure that our communities, environment and economy are resilient to the impacts of climate change and disaster risks. The policy ensures that risks are identified, assessed, reduced and managed. It was formulated following a risk governance assessment to analyse Vanuatu’s climate change and disaster risk governance capacity and needs at both national and local levels. The policy applies six principles: 1) accountability, 2) sustainability, 3) equity, 4) community focus, 5) collaboration, and 6) innovation. It aims to be accessible to and implemented by all Government agencies and non-Governmental stakeholders. The policy takes a practical approach regarding Vanuatu’s resources, exposure to risks, and demographic situation. It seeks to strengthen existing capacity at national, provincial and area council levels, drawing on the country’s rich heritage, traditional knowledge, and the lessons learned from the broad range of initiatives regarding climate change and disaster risk reduction.  
 
SDG 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
The Vanuatu Government considers the promotion and protection of human rights as an important aspect of its governance. It recognizes the value of the human rights of people in Vanuatu and has designed frameworks, policies and laws that enshrines the protection and promotion of fundamental human rights. The implementation of its international human rights obligations is being carried out by relevant agencies and stakeholders. The enactment of the Right to Information Act in 2017 is its most recent development in the area of realizing fundamental rights in particular the right to information. 
 
SDG 17 The means of implementation and revitalizing the global partnership for sustainable development The NSDP provides the strategy for addressing challenges and constraints to improve human rights situation in the country. Under the heading of “Society 4, Social Inclusion”, The Plan provides for an inclusive society which upholds human dignity and where the rights of all Ni-Vanuatu including women, youth, the elderly and vulnerable groups are supported, protected and promoted in our legislation and institutions. 
 	 
3. Policy and Enabling Environment  
 
The NSDP Final Technical Report, update in May 2018 provides the foundation for this section of this report.  The report, produced by DSPPAC provides more in-depth information regarding the ownership and process of designing the NSDP and enduring the integration of the SDGs.   
 
Enabling National Policies and Programs for 2010 Highlighted SDGs 
 
SDG 4. Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all The Ministry of Education and Training has formulated the following policies with a view to promoting and implementing the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC). These policies govern child protection, rights to education and related issues such as: Child Safeguarding Policy 2017; Revised Gender Equity in Education Policy 2018; Sweet Drink Policy 2014; Revised ECCE Policy 2017; Education Authority and School Registration Policy 2017; Information Management in the Education Sector Policy Statement 2014; Interim Vanuatu 
Education Sector Strategy 2017-2018; Open Vanuatu Education Management Information System (VEMIS) Policy 2017; Water Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) in Schools – Call to Action 2016; Draft Education and Training Sector Analysis 2019-2030; and Post-Secondary and Tertiary Education Policy. 
 
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
The enabling environment regarding economic growth and full employment is impacted by the completion of the 4th and 5th Report on CEDAW and reported to the Committee in 2016. 
 
SDG 8. Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
The Government of Vanuatu recognises the importance of building a strong, capable workforce and therefore is committed to ensuring capacity building and training across Ministries and departments. In this regard, the Government seeks further technical training support and resources from technical agencies, funding institutions, regional and international organisations and development partners. Further training on human rights and thematic issues need to be held with all relevant stakeholders, particularly police, corrections, teachers, health workers etc. 
 
SDG 10. Reduce inequality within and among countries 
The endorsement of the National Child Protection Policy 2016 – 2026; Child Safeguarding Policy 2017-2020 is a critical foundation to success with regard to this SDG. 
Furthermore, the following add to the foundation of the enabling environment for SDG 10:  
• Completion and submission of the initial and combined periodic CRPD Report. 
• Completion of the 2nd and 3rd CRC Report and constructive dialogue with CRC Committee in Suva, 2017, as well as the establishment of a Gender Officer in the Department of Water Resources (DoWR) and Ministry of Health. 
• Completion of reproductive health awareness on TAFEA and MALAMPA provinces with the assistance from United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and FNU, 2013 – 2017 cycle. 
 
SDG Goal 13. Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
In 2012, Vanuatu established a National Advisory Board on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction. 
Moreover, Vanuatu 2030, the People’s Plan, addresses climate change policies under the Environment Pillar:  Encouraging Blue-Green Economic Growth for an economy that fosters sustainable growth and development through low impact industries and modern technologies to ensure the well-being of future generations.  
• Establishment of the Ministry of Climate Change and a Gender and Protection Cluster, which ensures the inclusion of gender and protection issues in natural disasters. 
 
 
SDG 16. Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
The Department of Women’s Affairs (DWA) has formulated the key gender policies, having given due consideration to the CEDAW and the CRPD. These include the Vanuatu National Gender Equality Policy 20152019; National Disability Inclusive Development Policy 2018-2025; Vanuatu Child Online Protection National Strategy Framework for the Republic of Vanuatu 2014 –2021; Vanuatu National Child Protection Policy 20162026; Strategy for the Justice and Community Services Sector 2018-2021. 
• Establishment of an External Inspection Team to inspect and report on the conditions of and treatment of prisoners. 
• Establishment of a Right to Information Unit. 
 
SDG 17 The means of implementation and revitalising the global partnership for sustainable development Various other policies and frameworks discussed in this report are written in alignment to the NSDP. As a priority framework for Government, the national budget is mirrored to implement the priorities identified in the Plan. Furthermore, Government works to align development assistance with the NSDP through the National Aid Management Policy. 
 
Creating Ownership of the NSDP and SDGs 
 
In October 2013, in preparation of the design of a new National Development Plan, a high-level national development symposium was held in the village of Mele to consider the 2015 expiration of Vanuatu’s Priorities and Action Agenda (PAA), which was the national development plan (at that time), and the global Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  
 
The Mele symposium resolved that while the substance of the PAA remained relevant, the scope of the new national plan needed to be broadened and reprioritised to better reflect culture as the foundation of life in Vanuatu, and to better balance the social, environmental and economic pillars of development. Over the following three years, extensive consultation and technical analysis was undertaken to produce Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan as the country's new National Sustainable Development Plan (NSDP) for the period 2016 to 2030. Its formulation was undertaken during a period of considerable change to the global development agenda, and the transformation of Pacific regionalism.   
 
Following the 2013 Mele symposium, the six provincial government councils gave unanimous support to the rebalancing of national strategic priorities, and the Council of Ministers subsequently resolved to commission Technical Working Groups to draft a National Sustainable Development Plan as the successor to the Priorities and Action Agenda. A core team, comprising high-level government officials, technical officers in their respective fields, and members of civil society, was mandated to deliver the NSDP in accordance with set milestones. See Annex 1 for a chronological view of NSDP process and milestones. 
 
The Department of Strategic Policy, Planning and Aid Coordination (DSPPAC), situated within the Prime Minister’s Office, served as the secretariat to the NSDP core team with the responsibility of coordinating analysis and drafting of the new national plan. A key requirement of the drafting team was to ensure the new plan was grounded in the voice of people, and that the priorities identified during consultations were inclusive of all people, including children, youth, and women, marginalised and excluded groups (COM Decision 60 of 2014). 
 
SDG Incorporation: How the NSDP Embraces the SDGs 
 
By the end of 2015, a series of separate but interlinked intergovernmental processes culminated in world leaders adopting a number of landmark global compacts that significantly re-shaped how sustainable development and international cooperation would be defined and implemented. The 2030 Agenda and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) were agreed as the successor to the Millennium Development Goals. Implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and reporting across the now interlinked global and regional agreements is underpinned by the global commitment to national ownership. National stewardship of the development agenda is a vital element of sovereignty and to ensure that the development policies and activities of government, along with the assistance of development partners, is squarely aligned to the needs and aspirations of the population. Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan serves as the primary tool to deliver sustainable development to the people of Vanuatu. It also serves as the basis for implementing and coordinating reporting against the global and regional agreements, including the SDGs. 
 
The NSDP policy objectives have been designed to give effect to Vanuatu’s collective national development aspirations. They constitute an integrated, indivisible set of national priorities for sustainable development in all its dimensions (economic, social and environmental). The 15 NSDP goals are grouped under the three pillars:  Society, Environment and Economy, and are linked together by their foundation in our culture. The NSDP policy objectives prioritise actions and contribute to the realisation of the national vision, with each objective having up to three indicators and targets to facilitate monitoring, evaluation and reporting.  The SDG targets and indicators are integrated into the NSDP at this level.  
 
The Annual Development Report (ADR) is the principal means of communicating progress against Vanuatu 2030, as it has been for previous plans. The NSDP Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (M&E Framework) provides an outline of the revised ADR analysis format and provides a readily accessible understanding of the status of each of the 15 NSDP Goals, and a summary of the status of each Policy Objective.   The ADR provides an update of the NSDP Policy Objectives based on the status of the indicators (based on the targets).  
 

 
Vanuatu has committed to the implementation of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals and the Pacific Roadmap for Sustainable Development.  Vanuatu has articulated its priority policy objectives under the 15 NSDP Goals and the 196 indicators and 205 targets that are detailed in the M&E Framework. In doing so it has set the basis for implementing the global SDGs within the national context. With sustainable development at the core of both national and global goals, there are deep interlinkages and synchronicity across both sets of goals. An overview of the alignment of the global SDGs to the NSDP is found in Annex 2. 
 
 
Successes and Challenges 
Key national priorities and initiatives and commitments that the Vanuatu has undertaken and intends to undertake to overcome those challenges and constraints and improve human rights situations.   
 
Challenges 
The Government has made considerable progress and achieved significant milestones in the protection and promotion of human rights that takes into consideration Vanuatu’s culture and Christian faith. However, the Government continues to face numerous challenges to implementing various human rights commitments including understanding the content of the human rights treaties. Some of these challenges include limited resources both financial and human resources. With a very small public sector, the Government is the biggest employer.  
 
Further the impact of climate change and hostile natural calamities continues to impede national development and progress. In 2018, Vanuatu completed the whole scale evacuation of the inhabitants of Ambae, one of the main islands of Vanuatu, due to serious volcanic activities. The relocation of the people of Ambae has not been without its challenges which remain a priority issue for the Government. Moreover, the devastating impact of Cyclone Pam in 2015 resulted in wide-scale destruction of property and the loss of human life. Government has ensured as part of its priorities the rehabilitation work to ensure basic access to facilities and services for the people affected most by this cyclone. 
 
The NSDP provides the strategy for addressing challenges and constraints to improve human rights situation in the country. Under the heading of “Society 4, Social Inclusion”, the Plan provides for an inclusive society which upholds human dignity and where the rights of all Ni-Vanuatu including women, youth, the elderly and vulnerable groups are supported, protected and promoted in our legislation and institutions. Various other policies and frameworks discussed in this report by Government Ministries and Department are written in alignment to the NSDP. As a priority framework for Government, the national budget is mirrored to implementing the priorities identified in the Plan. Further development assistances sought are also towards realizing the NSDP. 
 
Successes 
Vanuatu is proud to be the first Pacific State to develop a National Implementation Plan for the Universal Periodic Review recommendations. This plan informed the Government’s commitment to implementing key recommendations accepted at the second cycle. Further Vanuatu is one of the few countries to establish a National Human Rights Committee by Regulation (Order 105 of 2014) under the Government Act (No.5 of 1998). 
 
 	 
4. Methodology, Process and Preparation 
 
The NSDP Consultation Report, finalised in December 2016 is used as the basis for this section of the report.  The consultation report provides more details regarding how the NSDP process ensured inclusion of inputs from all levels of Government and Society in Vanuatu. 
 
Vanuatu is the first country globally to undertake a review of their Voluntary National Report. A Peer Review team reviewed the initial draft of this Voluntary National Report (VNR) and provided feedback and recommendations. This shows a willingness to share experiences (both good and bad) and to open up government planning and reporting process with neighbouring Pacific countries. 
 
The VNR process and timeline highlights wide engagement at all levels. A timeline of the VNR process is located in Annex 3.  Additionally, Government continued the focus on public engagement, found throughout the NSDP process regarding the design and development of the VNR.  Government engaged the public regarding the VNR in both 2018 and 2019 (at the beginning and conclusion of the VNR report process) to ensure that their inputs were included in the report. 
 
This VNR process (and report) is the foundation for moving forward in 2020 with the first five-year stock take of the NSDP.  The VNR process has helped to illustrate areas where additional effort will be needed in order to complete the stock take in 2020.   
 
How it Started (Preparation) 
Initial discussions and consultations on a successor to the Priorities Action Agenda (PAA) began in 2013.  The first public consultation was held at the Farea Pasifika in Mele Village on the 18th October 2013, in the form of the National Development Symposium. These are the consultations which began in 2013 to get a feeling for what the NSDP needed to be, before the drafting process was begun.  The symposium, which was attended by the highest political and administrative officials of government, discussed the impending expiration of the Priorities and Action Agenda (PAA), which was the government’s previous high-level development plan, and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in 2015. 
 
The Symposium determined that the overall substance of the PAA should be retained but that it be reprioritized to reflect the daily lives of the people of Vanuatu; where culture is the foundation of life, and to also give equal weighting to social, environmental and economic prerogatives. Finally, there was a presentation and discussion outlining the way forward, including upcoming consultations, and an agreement that the development of a ‘National Sustainable Development Plan’ would progress in line with these consultations and the outcomes from the Symposium 
 
Design and Development (Process) 
Following the Mele Symposium, a high-level team was tasked to consult with all provincial government councils in November 2013. The six provincial governments gave unanimous support to rebalance the strategic planning priorities, with culture as the foundation of future planning and to ensure balanced development between the social, environmental and economic aspects of human life in the country. The team reiterated their commitments to continue to consult widely throughout the process to develop the plan, and to return to the provincial governments for further discussions.  
 
Following the Council of Ministers decision 60 of 2014, which gave approval to begin drafting a National 
Sustainable Development Plan, a Core Group was formed to guide the development of the document with the Department of Strategic Policy, Planning and Aid Coordination (DSPPAC) of the Prime Minister’s Office acting as the secretariat. The group was comprised of high-level government officials, technical officers in their respective fields and members of civil society organisations 
Forum at Chief’s Nakamal 
In 2014 a five-day public Forum on the National Sustainable Development Plan was held at the Chief’s Nakamal in Port Vila. Representatives from civil society were invited to present and share their economic, social, environmental, and cultural priorities for the next 15 years. The forum was open to the public and also aired live on Radio Vanuatu and Television blong Vanuatu. Participation was on average 75-100 people a day throughout the five-day event and was able to obtain a plethora of feedback to be considered by the Core Group. A feedback matrix was produced from the public forum and was used during subsequent drafting stages of the NSDP  
 
In late 2014, a Gap Analysis report was commissioned by the Core Group in order to identify differences between the Priorities Action Agenda (PAA) and the many government policy documents which had been launched during the PAA period. The report gave valuable insight to the gaps which had arisen over time and was informative for the subsequent drafting process when it was necessary to identify the main policy areas. 
Drafting Process 
After Cyclone PAM delayed NSDP preparation DSPPAC reconvened in June of 2015 to begin drafting the outline of the NSDP. This process involved looking back at all of the progress to date in order to develop a format to the document which could accommodate the aspirations of those who had so far contributed. 
 
From this period onwards, the drafting team within DSPPAC were meeting roughly once a week to discuss the NSDP development and maintain a momentum. Following four revisions over a number of weeks, a fifth draft document outline was produced and was accepted as the formal outline for the NSDP from July 2015 onwards to guide their work through the completion of the document. This initial outline was produced an initial chapter drafting process was underway during July-August 2015. These rough chapter outlines contained background and context information as well as some proposed policies and strategies to be further developed. 
 
A Writers Retreat was convened in September 2015. Over 75 people, with extensive experience in their sectors, attended the retreat and in groups were tasked with refining the initial chapter drafts and extracting clearer Goals and Policy Objectives for each.   Through the end of 2015, DSPPAC staff worked to refine and finalise the policy framework including the Goals and Policy Objectives for each of the three Pillars.  This involved extensive consultations with technical officers in their respective sectors, as well as the use of consultative working groups for some sectors.   The result was a that concise Consultation Draft was produced of the Goals and Policy Objectives in early 2016 
 
Leaving No One Behind 
Following the completion of the Consultation Draft in early 2016, and the translation of the policies into Bislama, DSPPAC began planning for an extensive consultative exercise throughout the country. The aim of these nation-wide consultations was to ensure that the aspirations of every Ni-Vanuatu were incorporated into the final Goals and Policy Objectives. By meeting with hundreds of people, in their communities, those responsible for the drafting were able to better reflect their vision and Vanuatu. 
 
There were six months of provincial consultations, during which DSPPAC staff visited 15 locations over all six provinces. The consultations usually took the form of a one-day community meeting, beginning with presentations by DSPPAC staff with each presenting for their area of expertise. Where possible, the presentations were in a language of the village if a member of the team shared their language. Following the presentations, the participants were encouraged to break into groups to take a closer look at the Policies which most interested them. The consultations finished with groups presenting back which Policies they agreed with or thought needed amending, which they disagreed with, and proposing new Policies where one may be missing. All feedback was recorded for consideration.  
 
Furthermore, the consultations in the provincial centres were predominantly attended by local government staff and provincial Civil Society representatives. As such, the meetings would follow a similar structure but the discussions and questions would often be more technical in nature. 
As well as the provincial consultations there were also consultations with various Civil Society organisations mainly around Port Vila, throughout 2015 and 2016 including the National Youth Council, the Malvatumauri Council of Chiefs, the Vanuatu Christian Council, the Vanuatu Society for People with Disabilities, Vanuatu Association of Non-Governmental Organisations and the Vanuatu National Women’s Council (VNWC).  
 
Validation 
The National Validation Summit was held at the National Convention Centre in Port Vila in November 2016. Approximately 200 participants including Vanuatu Honourable Members of Parliament, provincial authorities and community representatives from all 6 provinces, members of the Private Sector, Civil Society representatives, Development Partners, representatives of Chiefs and Churches, Director Generals, Directors and various other senior Government officials participated.  

5. Means of Implementation  
 
The Government has put into place a robust planning, management and evaluation structure that facilitates development planning, helps to target domestic and externally provided development resources, and measure development performance. This framework is at an early stage of use. The National Planning Structure consists of the following:  
• Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan (Vanuatu’s National Sustainable Development Plan -NSDP, 2016-2030)  
• Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan Monitoring and Evaluation Framework  
• Aid Management Policy and Implementation Strategy 
• Annual Development Report  
• National Planning Framework  
• Annual Budget Policy Statement  
• Medium Term Debt Strategy 
 
The most critical aspect regarding implementation is Government leadership and ownership.  In Vanuatu Government ownership and leadership regarding implementation of the NSDP is clearly evident.  Government approach to ensuring all of government and society are included in the NSDP has been in place since the start of the process.   
 
Critical Areas for Success 
In order to be successful in implementing the NSDP, the related policy objectives and meeting the NSDP and SDG goals and targets Vanuatu must: 
• Effectively link planning and budgeting (National Planning Framework)  
• Effectively link planning at all levels of Government (National Planning Framework) 
• Ensure adequate Financing (Aid Management Policy)  
• Ensure donor partnerships are strong and in place (Aid Management Policy)  
• Ensure the availability of data (Vanuatu National Statistics Office (VNSO) and NSDP Baseline Survey) 
• Ensure data is used for effective monitoring and evaluation (Monitoring and Evaluation Policy (MEP) and NSDP M&E Framework) 
 
Issues to be Strengthened 
Just as there are critical areas of success, there are also areas that Vanuatu must ensure have enough focus to ensure effective implementation including: 
• Public/Private Financing  
• Sources of Financing  
• Capacity Building/Human Resource Development 
• Reporting/Monitoring/Evaluation 
• Statistics including baseline data and trends analysis 
 
Vanuatu has developed and is using various tools in order to ensure the implementation process addresses those areas outlined above.  The following tools are the foundation the structure of the enabling environment  
 
Aid Management Policy 
The Aid Management Policy provides direction for the Government to coordinate and manage all development assistance flows to enhance the overall effectiveness of the assistance to achieve national development outcomes including those of the NSDP (and the SDGs),   
 
The policy also provides direction to Vanuatu’s development partners so there is a true partnership for development planning, management and evaluation. An accompanying document, the National Aid Management Implementation Strategy, identifies the functions, responsibilities and processes that accompanies and further implements the Aid Management Policy.  The Policy is aligned with the Government’s National Planning Framework (NPF) as well as the international framework that helps countries such as Vanuatu cooperate with development partners and take the lead for all development activities 
 
This policy provides direction for the Government of Vanuatu to coordinate and manage all development assistance flows to enhance the overall effectiveness of the assistance to achieve national development outcomes that are prioritised in the NSDP and the integrated SDG targets and indicators.  This policy focuses on 1) ownership of development priorities; 2) results; 3) inclusive development partnerships; and 4) transparency and accountability between Vanuatu and development partners. 
 
Aid Management Implementation Strategy 
While the Aid Management Policy (AMP) provides the general direction of the Government’s development cooperation framework, the implementation strategy provides more details about the institutions, processes and information required to help make the AMP work.    The objective of the implementation strategy is to ensure effective implementation of the Aid Management Policy.  The implementation strategy focuses on: 
• Defining the roles and responsibilities of the main Government entities and development partners for implementing the Aid Management Policy. 
• Identifying key performance indicators that will help measure progress to implement the strategy. 
• Defining processes and reporting mechanisms that will ensure that the Aid Management Policy is implemented using Government processes, systems and human resources. 
 
Annual Development Report 
The Annual Development Report is designed as a broad high-level report and references ministry reports as needed to provide stakeholders with further details and information. Ministry level information is linked to the NSDP and the ADR through the planning process. The NPF is aligned to the National M&E Framework in order to:  
• Align the implementation of the NSDP and accompanying M&E framework 
• Account for the alignment and localisation of the Sustainable Development Goals 
• Integrate Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) principles into national planning and policy making  
 
The ADR provides an overview of the annual progress of implementing The Plan.  
 
NSDP M&E Framework 
The NSDP M&E Framework is designed to complement Vanuatu 2030: The People’s Plan as well as the Final Technical Report on the National Sustainable Development Plan 2016 to 2030. The framework is results based, and is intended to serve as a guide for implementing, monitoring and reporting on The Plan 
 
The relevant information for conducting the NSDP Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and completing the Annual Development Report (ADR) is located in the M&E tables of the NSDP M&E Framework. Alignment with the relevant Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is included in these tables 
 
SOCIETY 1: A Nation based on traditional governance and Christian principles, which underpin our culture and continue to bestow life skills and knowledge to future generations 
Policy 
Objective 
Indicators 
Targets 2030 
Baseline* 
SDGs 
Policy Objective for each Goal 
Indicator(s) to be used for M&E 
Target(s) 	for 2030 
Baseline status of the indicator(s) 
Alignment with SDG 
Targets 	and 
Indicators 
 
National M&E Policy 
M&E is the tool used by the government to evaluate performance and identify the factors contributing to service delivery outcomes under all government programs and policies including Vanuatu 2030 and the Monitoring and Evaluation Policy (MEP) aligns with the NSDP results-based M&E framework. 
The MEP emphasises monitoring and evaluation within the broader Government management accountability framework.  The MEP clarifies the roles and responsibilities of government ministries, agencies, Commercial Government Business Enterprises (CGBEs) and statutory bodies in undertaking monitoring, evaluation and reporting. 
 
M&E greatly assists the government in terms of providing useful information, insight and more importantly providing performance feedback on government policies and programs. M&E provides insights regarding major constraints affecting the implementation of government programs, policies and projects, and a wellfunctioning M&E process can help the government move towards better results-based management and policy-making and ultimately to better development outcomes. Furthermore, M&E is inherent in the process of tracking progress of the SDGs, which the Government of Vanuatu has committed to do. 
 
National Planning Framework 
The National Planning Framework is further designed to improve the implementation the NSDP and to coordinate ministry planning and budgeting at all levels of Government with a focus on improved performance and service delivery. 
 
The NPF is designed to assist decision makers involved in planning at ministry level align Corporate Plans, Business Plans and policies with the NSDP and the MEP. The NPF includes critical information needed to ensure 
Vanuatu is successful in planning and reporting on progress related to the NSDP. A critical component of the NPF is the revised Corporate and Business Planning Guidelines which are included as part of the NPF 
 
Final Thoughts 
Vanuatu has committed to the implementation of the global 2030 Agenda and the 17 SDGs, and in doing so has joined other Pacific Islands Forum member states in directing that the global agenda be contextualised to national and regional priorities.  Additionally, Vanuatu recognizes that reporting should be streamlined across the SDGs, SAMOA Pathway and Framework for Pacific Regionalism.  
 	 
6. SDG Progress  
 
Progress for each of the Seventeen (17) SDG’s is presented in this section of the report.  For each SDG an overview of the alignment of SDG Targets with NSDP Policy Objectives and a short narrative summary of implementation for the aligned NSDP Policy Objectives is provided.    The table below provides a ‘stop light” snapshot summary of SDG Progress 
 
SDG 
SUMMARY 
STATUS 
SDG 1 
• With regard to SDG 1 results at this early stage of NSDP implementation are not current as there is a need to establish baselines to monitor and measure progress as such it is difficult to measure progress at this time 
 
SSG 2 
• Limited progress, but with specific positive outcomes already in place, including the rural cooperatives, ongoing training provided by DARD and the available data on primary production 
(MALFBB).   
 
SDG 3 
• With the focus on health, the results at this early stage of NSDP implementation continue to be promising and steady progress is evident. 
 
SDG 4 
• The Ministry of Education continues to focus on the areas of student retention, teacher qualifications, early childhood education, life-long learning and technical-vocational training as part of the implementation of NSDP Policy Objectives and in this regard, Vanuatu can be considered to be making steady progress  
 
SDG 5 
• With regard to issue of gender equality, Vanuatu has made steady progress for both NSDP Policy Objectives SOC 4.1 and SOC 4.2.  Policy and legislation focusing on women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming has been enacted and we expect continued positive results in this area moving forward 
 
SDG 6 
• Vanuatu efforts focus on progress regarding availability of safe and secure water and sanitation. In 2017 programs were launched with a focus on water safety and security.  These programs are the beginning of what is expected to be continued progress in this area, to date limited progress has been made  
 
SDG7 
• Regarding access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy), there are specific targets set out in the NSDP and some progress toward meeting these targets is evident.  However, additional baseline information (baseline survey) will assist in further monitoring moving forward.  However, at this time it is difficult to determine progress 
 
SDG 8 
• Vanuatu continues to see success in the growth of tourism, and there is an indication of initial success for expanding tourism to the outer islands and in the agriculture sector.  We see constructive and steady progress regarding tourism-related employment 
 
SDG 9 
• Promoting building a resilient infrastructure with sustainable industrialization is an important development objective for the NSDP. The NSDP indicators and targets, in alignment with the SDG 9 indicators provide a sufficient basis to monitor progress moving forward. However, with the information currently available it is difficult to assess progress at this time 
 
SDG 10 
• Reducing inequality among countries, empowering disabled and vulnerable groups is a central factor to positive success.  In summary Vanuatu is making steady positive progress in the area of empowering people with disability, and it is expected that continual improvement with result from the implementation of the Justice and Policing Infrastructure Priorities Plan 
 
SDG 11 
• Vanuatu has designed strong goals and targets related to SDG 11 and to date has made some but limited progress.  The implementation of The National Waste Management Strategy and Action Plan addresses urban waste management, providing cleaner and more livable urban centres.  Additionally, the work underway in physical planning and land use will provide clear directions for urban management in the coming years 
 
SDG 12 
• The policies and programs that are in place regarding aelan kakae, and the trainings on food preservation and storage provide solid support in regards to promoting sustainable consumption and production patterns.  Vanuatu is making steady progress 
 
SDG 13 
•  Implementation of the The National Environment Policy and Implementation Plan 2016-2030 is underway and provides a strong roadmap for progress.  Ten of the thirteen Ministries have sectoral policies for CC and DRM and are expected to be aligning annual budgets accordingly. All six provinces have established automated and manual detection systems for climate-related 
 

and volcanic hazards.  As of 2017, all six provinces have provincial disaster plans articulating preparedness and response arrangements. Vanuatu is making steady progress 

SDG 14 
• Vanuatu is making steady progress.  Ongoing training by MALFBB promoting sustainable food production (food production storage and preservation) continues and is providing information to all stakeholders.  The implementation of the National Fisheries Fleet Management Plan provides direction for sustainable use of fishing resources and nine fisheries management plans (for specific fisheries) are completed 
 
SDG 15 
• Vanuatu is making some/limited progress. The establishment of the water protected zones and the Forestry Inventory contribute to sustainable terrestrial resources as does ensuring that extraction activities are EIA compliant.  The implementation of the National Fisheries Fleet Management Plan provides direction for sustainable use of fishing resources and nine fisheries management plans are completed 
 
SDG 16 
• Vanuatu is making steady progress regarding SDG 16. The implementation of Justice and Community Services Sector Capacity Development Strategy 2017-2020 provides a strong foundation for ensuring equitable access to justice and legal institutions 
 
SDG 17 
• Good financial management and promoting economic activities in all sectors are important for Vanuatu.  Specifically, monitoring NSDP progress through the NSDP M&E Framework, using financial resources to promote sustainable environmental development, economic activity (tourism and promoting rural economic development) and managing debt are critical to success regarding SDG Goal 17, However until the 2020 stock take is completed it is difficult to assess progress at current time 
 
 

Key 
No Progress 
 
Some/Limited Progress 
 
Steady Progress 
 
Cannot Assess Progress 
 
 
 Detailed information regarding the alignment of SDG Targets and Indicators with the NSDP Policy Objectives (and implementation status) is located in Annex 3.  This information is monitored as part of the ongoing M&E process for the annual report (ADR) on NSDP progress.   
 
SDG 1: End Poverty in all its Forms Everywhere 
SDG Targets (Goal 1) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Target (1.4)  
(ECO 3.6) 
   
ECO 3.6: Improve the provision of government services in rural areas (SDG Indicators (1.4.1, 11.a.1) 
Information regarding this policy objective is currently not reported (as of 2017).  In order to evaluate this Policy Objective government plans to track 1) Average traveling distance to nearest school, health facility, police post by province, and 2) Number of controlled waste disposal facilities. Currently this baseline data has yet to be established, however during the 2019 ADR and the NSDP Stock Take scheduled for 2020 we expect further clarifications regarding this information. 
 
 Summary 
In summary the NSDP has as one of its core values the reduction and elimination of poverty in the country as stated as one of the NSDP Development Aspirations:    
 
“An economy based on equitable, sustainable growth that creates jobs and income earning opportunities accessible to all people in rural and urban areas” 
 
Therefore, SDG 1 is aligned with the NSDP as a whole and as we strive to implement the NSDP Policy Objectives we raise the standard of living for the entire population.  With regard to SDG 1 results at this early stage of NSDP implementation are not current as there is a need to establish baselines to monitor and measure progress, as such it is difficult to measure progress at this time 
 
SDG 2:  End Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved Nutrition and Promote Sustainable Agriculture 
SDG Targets (Goal 2) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (2.3) (2.4) (2.b) (2.c)  
(ENV 1.1) (ENV 1.3) (ENV 1.5) 
(ECO 3.4) (ECO 3.5) (ECO 4.8)  
 
ENV 1.1:     Increase agricultural and fisheries food production using sustainable practices to ensure sufficient access to affordable and nutritious food (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 14.7.1) Information regarding this policy objective is not as current as it needs to be.  At this time Government is working to establish a baseline regarding the proportion of households engaged in food production for their own consumption.  It is expected this will be addressed in the 2018/19 census.  In the 2017 annual report the Ministry of Agriculture, Live-stock, Fisheries, Forestry, and Bio-Security (MALFFB) provides up to date information on primary agriculture production. Some of the key results are progress regarding increased productivity for the following commodities; kava replanting, coconut replanting, coffee cultivation, cocoa cultivation, root cultivation 
 
ENV 1.3:  Reduce reliance on food imports through import substitution for food products that can be produced domestically (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2 2.b.1, 2.b.2, 2.c.1) 
DARD has ongoing programs focusing on potatoes, carrots, onions, small livestock/ integrated farming, coffee, cocoa/chocolate, Tilapia farming and Prawn farming.  These programs are designed to assist local producers increase production, thereby decreasing the reliance on imports and increasing local food security.  This should also reduce to cost to buyers.  DARD is also working to address the issue of food costs through the Vanuatu Primary Producers Association Bill .Currently MALFFB is in the process of recruiting a CEO and one of its roles is to established VPPA board and to implement the Act Additionally, MALFFB and the Ministry of Trades, Tourism, Cooperatives, Industry, and Ni-Vanuatu Business (MCTTCINVB) are working to establish a Food Price Inflation Rate/Food Price Index that will provide consumers information regarding the cost of food relative to other prices in the country.  Work is ongoing with VNSO to establish this information database. 
 
ENV 1.5: Enhance traditional agricultural practices, focusing on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 12.8.1)  
As of 2017 trainings have been conducted by MALFFB.  It is noted that 30% of MALFFB trainings are conducted jointly with NGOs. It is expected that these will be ongoing in the coming years.  Furthermore MALFBB implements integrated farming systems in all provinces, and this information is included int the 2017 annual report.  Additionally, an Agriculture Census is planned by VNSO as part of their 10-year survey plan. The establishment of a crop diversity index with a focus on fruit and vegetables (average number of varieties planted of crops by province) is planned.  Currently at the department level, technical index Information from Vanuatu Agricultural Research Training Centre (VARTC) is collected.  As of 2017 VNSO was asked to assist MALFBB with establishing a baseline for this index.  MALFBB does include, in the 2017 annual report the varieties of crops, (fruits and vegetables produced). 
 
ECO 3.4: Increase primary sector production, including through extension services and cooperatives (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2 2.4.1) 
The NSDP outlines a target for agriculture extension services per capita at 1 officer per 500 households, however, currently the data for this target is not available. However, information regarding rural producer cooperatives shows that as of 2017 a total of 378 cooperatives are in operation throughout the country with the target to raise this by at least 20% by 2030 
 
 
 
ECO 3.5: Improve the collection, analysis and dissemination of market data on the rural economy and communities (SDG Indicators 2.c.1). 
The NSDP outlines as a target that the total annual number of rural economic analysis reports published will increase by 15% by 2030.  At this time there is no reported information on the number of published reports. 
 
ECO 4.8:  Ensure processes for acquiring and using land for economic activity provides a stable platform for investment and business growth (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 5.a.1, 17.5.1) 
As per the NSDP, Vanuatu plans to establish a database of the annual number of new businesses registered by type.  At this time this is still in progress.  There is information available regarding business registration that can be currently used to gauge, to a limited extent, ongoing investment and business growth  
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 2 results at this early stage of NSDP implementation are mixed.  There is a need to establish baselines in some areas so that progress can be reviewed.  VNSO is working on information regarding the food poverty line, we expect this information to be available for the 2020 NSDP Stock Take Progress in the NSDP Policy Objectives is summarized below.  The aligned NSDP Policy Objectives, and related indicators provide a clear pathway for Vanuatu to meet the SDG 2 targets as outlined above.   
 
Baseline data and further information collection are needed in the short term to ensure that that progress regarding the NSDP policy objectives can be monitored and evaluated.   At this time Vanuatu’s progress regarding SDG 2 can be considered limited, but with specific positive outcomes already in place, including the rural cooperatives, ongoing training provided by DARD and the available data on primary production (MALFBB).  This ongoing effort will lead to Vanuatu improved capacity to monitor (as integrated into the NSDP M&E Framework) the selected SDG Goal 2 indicators. 
 
SDG 3:  Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well-Being for all at all Ages 
SDG Targets (Goal 3) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (3.1) (3.2) (3.3) (3.4) (3.7) (3.8) (3.b) (3.c) (3.d) 
(SOC 3.1) (SOC 3.2)  
(SOC 3.3) (SOC 3.4)  
 
SOC 3.1:  Ensure that the population of Vanuatu has equitable access to affordable, quality health care through the fair distribution of facilities that are suitably resourced and equipped (SDG 
Indicators 3.1.1/3.1.2, 3.7.1/3.7.2, 3.8.1), 3.c.1) 
Targets in the areas of per capita density of health professionals, maternal mortality rate and the number of and capacity of health facilities provide insight into progress regarding this target.   Vanuatu has set a health density target for 2030 of 38 Heath Workers, per 10,000 people.  Currently this figure stands at slightly over 17 health workers per 10,000.  Additionally, Vanuatu as a target for maternal mortality to less than 70 deaths per 100,000 live births.  This currently stands at 122 per 100,000 population (2017).  We have also set a target that by 2030 100% of all Government Health Facilities will be compliant with Role Delineation and essential health service minimum standards for human resourcing, infrastructure functional space & equipment requirements.  At this time the Ministry of Health (MOH) is developing the baseline for this information 
 
SOC 3.2:  Reduced the Incidence of Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases (SDG Indicators 
3.3.2, 3.3.3, 3.3.4, 3.3.5, 3.4.1) 
While the Ministry of Health continues to collect information on the whole range of Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs), the NSDP focuses on three critical NCD indicators.  The first, the number of diabetic related amputations, next the incidence of TB (per 100,000) and the annual malaria parasite incidence rate.   In 2017 the total number of NCD related amputation was 52 while the malaria incidence rate was 3.6 Annual Parasitic Incidence (API) per 1,000 population.  The Ministry is working to set viable targets and information collection mechanisms for these indicators moving forward to the NSDP Stock Take expected for 2020. 
 
SOC 3.3:  Promote Healthy Lifestyle Choices and Health Seeking Behaviour to Improve Population Health and Well Being (SDG Indicators 3.b.1, 3.2.1) 
Regarding healthy lifestyle choice, the NSDP targets, immunization rates (DTP3), prevalence of adult obesity and the under five mortality-rate.  Data for obesity and the under five mortality-rate are not available as of 2017, however the targets for 2030 are 25/1000 live births and an obesity rate of less than 33% of the population.  The vaccination rate as of 2017 was 94% for Penta 3 and 88% for the MR vaccine, indicating positive progress towards the 2030 target of 95%. 
 
SOC 3.4:  Build health sector management capacity and systems to ensure the effective and efficient delivery of quality services that are aligned with national directives (SDG Indicators 3.c.1, 3.d.1) The Ministry of Health has in place a Health Sector Strategy (HSS) and has indicated that by 2020 all units should have strategic plans linking to this HSS.  In coordination with this HSS the Ministry has a target that by 2030 at least 90% of all MOH corporate positions will be filled on a permanent basis.  Additionally, MOH targets that 100% of IHR Component 2 attributes be met and maintained by 2030. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 3, and the focus on health, the results at this early stage of NSDP implementation continue to be promising and steady progress is evident.   The Ministry of Health (MOH) continues to make progress with regard to both National targets and the SDG targets.  Furthermore, ministry planning provides a clear roadmap for further implementation. The Health Sector Strategy (HSS) is an example of the coordination between National Planning (NSDP) Ministry Planning and the SDGs.  MOH has aligned national, sector and SDGs in the HSS so that progress can continue to be monitored and evaluated.  Additional information collection is needed to provide a more effective status review of the NSDP and SDG targets and indicators.  It is expected the continued planning efforts and the implementation of the HSS will provide additional insights into the progress of the SDG targets and the NSDP policy objectives.  
 
SDG 4:  Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and Promote Lifelong Learning Opportunities for All 
SDG Targets (Goal 4) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (4.1) (4.2) (4.4) (4.b) (4.c)  
(SOC 2.1) (SOC 2.2)  
(SOC 2.3) (SOC 2.4)  
 
SOC 2.1:  Ensure every child, regardless of gender, location, educational needs or circumstances has access to the education system (SDG Indicators 4.1.1, /4.2.1) 
Access to education is an important goal for Vanuatu as well as the SDGs.  In the NSDP education access is monitored by both kindergarten attendance and education retention rates through years 6 and 13.   In 2018 new entrants in primary year 1 who have attended the Early Childhood Development Program is reported at 73%. 
 
The year 6 survival rate of 64% in 2017 is well on the way to meeting the NSDP target of 85%.  The 11.4% survival rate for year 13 is well below the target of 30%, but hopefully, improvement is made in the coming years in alignment with the year 6 survival rate.  Information regarding the number of six-year-old children attending kindergarten for 2018 Early Childhood Community Education (ECCE) enrolment is 15,661 with a total of 1,306 ECCE teachers). 
 
SOC 2.2:  Build trust in the education system through improved performance management systems, teacher training, and the reliable delivery of quality services (SDG Indicator 4.c.1) 
The Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) has set a target that 100% of eligible schools receive and implement the school grants.  This will measure administrative and performance management.  In 2017, 93% of the eligible schools received their grants.  Additionally, at the sector level MOET tracks teacher training and qualifications (SDG 4.c.1) and part of the ongoing education quality improvement with 65% of teachers reported certified for 2018. The breakdown of teacher qualifications by degrees/certificate (for both primary and secondary) is available with MOE. 
 
SOC 2.3: Formalise early childhood education and life-long learning opportunities within the education system (SDG Indicators 4.2.1, 4.3.1) 
As part of improving life-long learning opportunities, it is important that students meet literacy and numeracy standards.  Targets in both Anglo (year 4 and 6) and Franco (year 4 and 6) have been set as part of the NSDP process.  As of 2017 these statistics were not available.  However, it is expected that this information will be available as we move to the 2020 NSDP Stock Take. 
 
SOC 2.4:  Increase higher education opportunities, including technical and vocational training (SDG Indicators 4.3.1, 4.b.1) 
Technical and vocational education is a critical part of the overall education system in Vanuatu.  The NSDP has set a target that 80% of all technical/vocational and post schools be certified and registered.  As of 2017 36 of the 60 schools (60%) are certified and registered.   
 
Summary 
In summary the NSDP Policy Objectives, and related indicators, provide evidence that Vanuatu has designed a strong foundation to evaluate progress regarding NSDP and SDG education goals and targets.  The Ministry of Education and Training continues to focus on the areas of student retention, teacher qualifications, early childhood education, life-long learning and technical-vocational training as part of the implementation of NSDP Policy Objectives and in this regard it can be considered to be making steady progress as per SDG 4.  Additional information must be collected in order to better monitor the progress, and a coordination of the evaluation of both NSDP and SDG indicators will provide a clearer focus of improvement in the future.  
 
SDG 5: Achieve Gender Equality and Empower all Women and Girls 
SDG Targets (Goal 5) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (5.1) (5.2) (5.5) (5.A) (5.c)  
(SOC 4.1) (SOC 4.2)  
(ECO 4.8)  
 
SOC 4.1:  Implement gender-responsive planning and budgeting processes (SDG Indictors 5.5.1/5.5.2, 
5.a.1, 5.c.1) 
As of 2017 the Council of Ministers in COM Decision 94/2017 endorsed and approved the inclusion of Gender Responsive Budgeting (GRB) in the budget process. Given this decision, GRB was integrated in the 2018 budget process for 5 Ministries.  It is targeted that this increases through 2030.  Additionally, in order to increase the number of women participating in the decision-making processes, in 2017 COM Decision 56 of 2014 approved that government bodies should have representation of women in established national and statutory bodies.  The NSDP also focuses on other indicators for women’s empowerment that have been the focus of National Policy and legislation at both the national and provincial government levels.  These policy and legislation directives include 1) The National Strategy for the Justice and Community Services Sector, 2018 – 2021 launched on March, 2018 has Gender as a Cross-cutting Policy, and 2) the endorsed legislation in the Municipalities’ Act to approve Reserve seats for women at the Municipality in 2013, 2015 and 2018 has supported the urban voters to start voting for women. This is evident in the Port Vila Municipal Council (PVMC) 2018 election where results showed that number of votes cast for women has improved (additional information is found in ADR 2018). 
 
SOC 4.2: Prevent and eliminate all forms of violence and discrimination against women, children and vulnerable groups (SDG indicators 5.1.1, 5.2.1/5.2.2) 
The NSDP includes well-being indicators in several areas.  Included here is the well-being indicator regarding counseling for psychological well-being.  In 2017 it was reported that 6,063 counselling sessions were recorded from July 2016 – June 2017. Of this number, 5,804 were women, 183 were girls and 76 boys. 1,610 Counselling sessions were recorded from July 2017 – December, 2017.  Of this number, 1,520 were women, 87 were girls and 3 boys.  Further evaluation of the success of these sessions will provide additional information in the future.  The NSDP policy objective of eliminating violence against women and children is being monitored.  In 2017, 260 Family Protection orders were served, 237 for Domestic Violence Cases, 23 for sexual assault cases.  Ongoing monitoring of domestic violence charges continues with the Vanuatu Women’s Centre (VWC) reporting from July to December 2017, 216 clients were assisted of which 10 were for accessing Family Protection Order (FPO), 14 Child Maintenance, 10 Family Maintenance, 19 Child Custody, 119 Divorce, 5 injury claims, 9 property claims, 1 Domestic Violence case and 29 others. The NSDP targets at least a 10% reduction in these numbers by 2030. 
 
ECO 4.8:    Ensure processes for acquiring and using land for economic activity provides a stable platform for investment and business growth (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 5.a.1, 17.5.1) 
In an effort to promote gender inclusive economic growth, the NSDP includes a policy objective to ensure equitable access for acquiring and using land for economic activity.  Data regarding this policy objective was not available as of 2017, however, as part of the ongoing process, a baseline of economic activity and establishment of new businesses will be established (disaggregated by gender) for ongoing monitoring. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 5 issue of gender equality, Vanuatu has made steady progress for both NSDP Policy Objectives SOC 4.1 and SOC 4.2.  Policy and legislation focusing on women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming have been enacted and we expect continued positive results in this area moving forward.    
 
In summary, the implementation of NSDP Policy Objectives, and monitoring of related indicators provide evidence that Vanuatu is making steady and constructive progress in the area of gender equality and women’s empowerment. The GRB legislation is expected to eventually be implemented by all Government agencies and provide an improved focus on gender issue during the budgeting process.  Furthermore, the Legislation at both the National and Provincial levels of Government continues to improve women’s rights and empowerment in the decision-making process at all levels.  We continue to closely monitor incidents of domestic violence and expect the number of cases to decline over time.  Gender inclusive economic growth is needed for the country to continue to expand the economic well-being of all and is an area that is also included in the NSDP. 
 
SDG 6:  Ensure Availability and Sustainable Management of Water and Sanitation for 
All 
SDG Targets (Goal 6) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (6.1) (6.3)  
(ECO 2.2)  
 
ECO 2.2:   Ensure all people have reliable access to safe drinking water and sanitation infrastructure (SDG Indicators 6.1.1, 6.3.1) 
 
The NSDP target for the population with access to reliable and safe drinking water is 100% by 2030.  As of 2017, there is not complete data on this indicator.  Recovery projects in response to Cyclone PAM have repaired/increased the number of rain water harvesting systems and direct gravity feed systems around communities of the country (see Cyclone PAM Report for additional information).  Additional work in response to Ambae volcanic activities also provided quick fixes to water systems on Maewo and Santo.  Additionally, the National Implementation Plan (NIP) and Capital Assistance Program (CAP), both launched in 2017, are expected to add to the increased access to safe and reliable drinking water by helping communities create and act upon Drinking Water Safety and Security Plan (DWSSP) which also launched in 2017.  The NSDP also includes a target of 100% of the population with reliable access to improved sanitation facilities by 2030.  Currently we are working on the baseline/information collection for this issue. 
 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 6 Vanuatu efforts focusing on progress regarding availability of safe and secure water and sanitation. In 2017 programs were launched with a focus on water safety and security.  These programs are the beginning of what is expected to be continued progress in this area. In summary, national programs and policies, aimed at improving access to safe and reliable drinking water are underway, with some but limited progress evident. These policies and programs are expected to provide improvements in the coming years.  This will be reviewed during the NSDP 2020 stock-take.  Additionally, information regarding access to improved sanitation facilities will be reviewed at this time, specifically options at identifying information regarding wastewater and sanitation throughout the country.   
 
SDG 7:  Ensure Access to Affordable, Reliable, Sustainable and Modern Energy for All 
SDG Targets (Goal 7) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (7.1) (7.2) (7.3) (7.a) (7.b) 
(ENV 2.1) (ENV 2.3) 
(ECO 2.1)  
 
ENV 2.1:  Increase access to knowledge, expertise and technology to enact our blue-green growth strategies (SDG Indicators 7.a.1, 15.9.1, 15.a.1) 
Vanuatu, as part of the NSDP will design and implement national policies that are “blue-green growth friendly”.  By 2030 it is planned that 100% of all new development projects will be designed as “green” infrastructure projects.  This forward-looking policy will be implemented throughout the life of the NSDP 
 
ENV 2.3:   Promote renewable sources of energy and promote efficient energy use (SDG Indicators 7.1.2, 
7.2.1, 7.3.1, 7.b.1) 
The 2030 target for percentage of grid-based electricity generated from renewable energy sources is 100%.  As of the most recent information (Jan 2016-Jan 2018) on average, 18% of electricity generation comes from renewable sources.  Additionally, the proportion of households using renewable energy technology as main source of lighting was 5,440 households using Vanuatu Rural Energy Project (VREP) and approximately 70 household using Loltong Pico Hydro. The NSDP target is 100% by 2030.  Finally, the NSDP has a target of at least 14% of lighting and refrigeration appliances will meet high energy standards by 2030.  Currently there is information regarding the various models of refrigerators, freezers and air conditioning units that are imported but the actual percentages are not yet calculated.   
 
ECO 2.1:  Increase access to safe, reliable and affordable modern energy services for all that are increasingly generated from renewable sources and reduce reliance on imported fossil fuels (SDG Indicators 
7.1.1, 7.1.2, 7.2.1) 
This NSDP Policy Objective aligns with ENV 2.3 above. As in ENV 2.3 the target for households sourcing energy for lighting from renewable sources is 100% by 2030.  With 5510 total households currently using renewable energy sources (see ENV 2.3) there is now a need for the development of baseline to measure progress.  Additionally, the 2030 target for total number of mini-grid renewable energy systems in rural communities by province is 14% by 2030 (5% by 2020).  As of 2017 there exists 1 hydro pico grid.  However, no further information or data is available at the current time. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 7, access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy, specific targets have been set out in the NSDP and some progress toward meeting these targets is evident.  However, additional baseline information (baseline survey) will assist in further monitoring moving forward. 
 
In summary access to safe reliable and renewable energy sources is moving progressing, however specific details regarding the rate of progress is difficult to determine at this time.  Statistics on the importation of energy efficient appliances can be collected, and this will be a good first step in evaluating the energy efficiency outlook in the future.  A focus on the ability of households to source energy from renewable sources is also an area where information collection will help to monitor the rate of progress.  At this it is difficult to determine progress regarding how well Vanuatu is doing in the area of energy efficiency. 
 
SDG 8:  Promote Sustained, Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth, Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for All 
SDG Targets (Goal 8) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (8.1) (8.2) (8.3) (8.5) (8.6) (8.8) (8.9) (8.10) (8.a) 
(ECO 1.1) (ECO 1.4) (ECO 1.7) (ECO 1.8) 
(ECO 1.9) (ECO 3.1) (ECO 3.2) 
(ECO 4.1) (ECO 4.4) (ECO 4.5)  
(ECO 4.6) (ECO 4.7)  
 
ECO 1.1:  Promote stable growth through responsible fiscal, and a counter-cyclical monetary policy targeting stability in inflation (SDG Indicators 8.1.1) 
A stable GDP growth rate and a low inflation rate are critical factors regarding economic development.  The inflation rate (Consumer Price Index analysis) target is < 4% by 2030.  As of 2017 there was an increase from 0.8 to 2.5 % in the inflation rate.  In 2017 GDP Increased from 0.2% to 3.5%, which aligns with the 2030 target of 4%.  These figures will again be updated in 2018. 
 
ECO 1.4:  Increase trade and investment opportunities and reduce barriers, including through the use of Aidfor-Trade (SDG Indicators 8.a.1, 7.12.1) 
The value of national/merchandise trade increased from 39,989 to 41,408 (millions, vatu) in 2017. The NSDP target for 2030 is an increase of 20%.  Additionally, the NSDP sets a target of 20% improvement for the current accounts balance charge.  In 2017 data was not available to measure evaluate this figure. 
 
ECO 1.7:  Stimulate economic diversification to spread the benefits of growth and increase economic stability (SDG Indicators 8.2.1, 8.3.1) 
The NSDP focus is on the level of production of major commodities (including cocoa and copra) and on the number of business licenses issued to Ni-Vanuatu.  For commodity production the 2030 target is for cocoa and copra to increase to 10-15% of the total production.  As of 2017 no date was reported for either of this production.  Data on the number of business licenses was also not available.  Commodity production is important to economic growth, as such data collection in this area is important for future monitoring and reporting.  Ni-Vanuatu ability to conduct business is also critical to the long-term economic future of the country. 
 
ECO 1.8: Ensure financial sector stability, make financial services affordable and accessible for all through pursuing financial inclusion strategies (SDG Indicators 8.10.1 8.10.2) 
Access to banking services is important for a strong financial sector.  The NSDP emphasis on interest rate levels and deposit ratios is useful for monitoring the banking sector.  The 2030 NSDP targets of average interest rate of 15% and an increase 6-10% increase in deposit ratios) will provide good insights into the state of the banking sector moving forward.  Additionally, the NSDP targets a 30% increase in “new users” for financial services (measured by new account openings).  This will provide insight into access of the population to banking and financial services. 
 
ECO 1.9:  Promote financial literacy and consumer empowerment (SDG Indicators 8.10.1 8.10.2) 
Financial literacy is important regarding the capacity of the population to take advantage of economic and business-related opportunities.  The NSDP target is that 50% of the population will be financially literate by 2030.  Data collection needs to be conducted to determine the current rate of financial literacy  
 
ECO 3.1: Promote broad-based growth by strengthening linkages between tourism, infrastructure, agriculture and industry in rural areas and diversity the rural economy (SDG Indicators 8.9.1, 
8.9.2, 17.17.1) 
The number of businesses participating in the annual agri-tourism festival by sector is a good indicator of the successful coordination of tourism, infrastructure and agriculture.  In 2017 there were 56 participating associations and cooperatives in the festival (see ADR for list).  The target is to see an increase of at least an overall 20% participation in this festival. Additionally, we will monitor the total annual value of tourism industry, infrastructure, agricultural production and industry as a proportion of GDP, with a target of 40% increase by 2020.  At this time baseline data is being collected. 
 
ECO 3.2:  Deepen the integration of the tourism sector into the rural economy to spread opportunities to rural communities (SDG Indicators 8.9.1, 8.9.2, 17.17.1) 
In 2017 the number of visitors traveling to outer islands was over 43,000 (breakdown included in ADR).  This is the baseline use to monitor this indicator as the NSDP targets a 10% increase through 2030.  This coincides with tourism air and sea arrivals in 2017 with (37,779 sea arrivals and 12,283 air arrivals (VNSO).   The 2030 target is for an increase of 30% in total arrivals.  Tourism contributions to the economy are significant and the continued integration into the overall economy (both urban and rural) is critical to continued economic growth.  This is further evident in that as of 2017 there are a reported 161 guest houses, 876 handicraft shops and 132 bus tour operators registered as doing business (full listing in ADR).   
 
ECO 4.1:  Create an improved business environment with a stable regulatory framework, which promotes competition, protects consumers, attracts investment and reduces the costs of doing business (SDG Indicators 8.2.1, 17.5, 17.5.1) 
The NSDP targets and annual increase of 7% in Gross Fixed Capital Formation (with a 10% increase by 2020).  At this time data collection has not yet been completed. 
 
ECO 4.4:  Improve and expand the range of sustainable tourism products and services throughout Vanuatu and strengthen links to local production (SDG Indicators 8.9.1, 8.9.2) 
The NSDP focus on sustainable tourism emphasises the proportion of registered hospitality institutions with rooms and services equipped with energy efficient lighting and appliances.  A 20% increase by 2020 is the NSDP target, however at this time a baseline has not yet been established.   
 
ECO 4.5:  Increase the number of decent, productive employment opportunities, particularly for young women and men, and people with disabilities (SDG Indicators 8.5.1, 8.5.2, 8.6.1) 
The Employment Cost Index (ECI) will assist in monitoring this policy objective.  A target of a 15% increase is in place for 2020, however at this time data for measurement of this indicators has yet to be reported. 
 
ECO 4.6: Ensure the health and safety, employment rights and skills development of the workforce (SDG Indicators 8.8.1, 8.8.2) 
The NSDP targets a 15% increase (by 2020) in the labour force participation rate (by sector).  As of 2017 data was not yet available to monitor this indicator.  Additionally, we plan to monitor Labour Union complaints as part of overall health safety and employment rights of the workforce.  Coordination with Union leaders will be completed in order to monitor this information. 
 
ECO 4.7:  Increase labour mobility nationally and internationally, including through the collection and analysis of comprehensive labour market data (SDG Indicators 8.8.1, 8.8.2) 
Information on participation in seasonal worker programmes, labour market flows) and total annual remittance as a proportion of GDP will be used to monitor national and international labour mobility.  This is an important policy objective regarding the ability of non-skilled workers to participate in the broader international labour market available to Ni-Vanuatu.  
 
Summary 
In summary promoting inclusive and sustainable economic growth is focused on continuing to expand business and employment opportunities related to tourism and national and international labour markets.  Along with the expansion of business opportunities must come the expansion of access to banking and other financial sector tools.   Vanuatu continues to see success in the growth of tourism, and a there is an indication of initial success for expanding tourism to the outer islands and in the agriculture sector.  With regard to SDG 8, we see steady and constructive progress regarding tourism related employment. Furthermore, access to banking and financial services, and increased business opportunities (tourism) will play a crucial role in continuing progress regarding sustained economic growth and employment.  Moreover, monitoring of key economic indicators including GDP and inflation rate will continue to provide measurement of progress.  
 
SDG 9:  Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
SDG Targets (Goal 9) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (9.1) (9.3) (9.a) (9.b) (9.c)  
(ECO 2.3) (ECO 2.4) (ECO 2.5)  
(ECO 2.9) (ECO 3.3) (ECO 4.3)  
 
ECO 2.3: Ensure that all public infrastructure, including health, education and sports facilities are safe, accessible, secure and maintained in compliance with building codes and standards (SDG Indicators 9.1.1, 11.2.1) 
The NSDP policy objective includes monitoring both new and existing buildings (repairs) that are in compliance with building codes and standards with a goal of 100% compliance by 2030.  Currently we are collecting information on current building compliance levels. 
 
ECO 2.4: Enact clear infrastructure governance, legislative frameworks and standards for resilient infrastructure and maintenance (SDG Indicators 9.1.1, 11.2.1). 
The NSDP policy objective includes monitoring the proportion of road and building standards implemented with a goal of 100% by 2030.  Currently we are collecting information on current compliance levels. 
 
ECO 2.5:  Improve partnerships and cost-effective use of resources to ensure sustainable asset management and maintenance (SDG Indicators 9.a.1) 
The approved annual asset management budget will be used as the monitoring tool for this Policy Objective.  In order to ensure sustainable asset management and maintenance the target is to increase this budget allocation by VT100 bill over the next five years (2017 baseline).  This will be monitored accordingly. 
 
ECO 2.9:  Increase use of and access to information and communications technologies, including on-line government services (SDG Indicators 9.c.1, 17.8.1) 
Access to broadband connections and the annual change in total users for on-line government services will be monitored regarding progress of this Policy Objective.  The target is for 100% broadband connections by 2030 and for a total of 80% of on line users of government services  
 
ECO 3.3:  Improve access to markets through quality infrastructure, utilities, storage and processing facilities in rural areas (SDG Indicators 9.3.1, 9.3.2, 14.b.1) 
In order to monitor this Policy Objective, we will focus on 1) Total number of standard operational storage and processing facilities located in rural areas by province, 2) Rate of Return to investments in rural infrastructure and, 3) Rate of Return to investments in rural infrastructure.  Targets for 2030 have been set in the NSDP M&E Framework, however Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities has noted that they will need assistance from VNSO to establish the monitoring information. 
 
ECO 4.3:  Increase production and processing of niche commodities, and value addition to commodities in which Vanuatu enjoys a comparative advantage (SDG Indicators 9.b, 9.b.1). 
Production of local products is the focus of this Policy Objective.  This includes the total number of processed local products produced per annum for domestic consumption and export as well as the ratio of processed export commodities (including coconut, kava, cocoa, coffee) to raw exports. Targets for 2030 have been set in the NSDP M&E Framework, however baseline information and data collection have not yet been established.  It is expected that this information will be available by the 2020 NSDP Stock-Take.  
 
Summary 
In summary promoting building a resilient infrastructure with sustainable industrialization is an important development objective for both the SDGs and the NSDP.  Monitoring local production provides important insight into the success of local business (agriculture and manufacturing). Legislation regarding building codes and other infrastructure development assists business development by providing the capacity for strong infrastructure (roads and buildings) that will only help the local economy become more productive.  Additionally, increasing the budget for ongoing asset management will help to ensure sufficient funding for maintenance and repairs.  The NSDP indicators and targets, in alignment with the SDG 9 indicators provide a sufficient basis to monitor progress moving forward. However, with the information currently available it is difficult to assess progress at this time 
 
SDG 10:  Reduce Inequality Within and Among Countries 
SDG Targets (Goal 10) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (10.3) (10.4) (10.a) (10.b)   
(SOC 4.3) (SOC 4.4) (SOC 4.5) (SOC 6.8)  
(ECO 1.6)   
 
SOC 4.3: Empower and support people with disabilities (SDG Indicators 10.3.1, 10.4.1) 
As of 2017, 12% of people are reported as being with some disability in Vanuatu. This continues to be monitored and updated.  To further empower and support people with disabilities, the disability desk of the Ministry of Justice and Community Services (MJCS), and partners, continue to work with relevant bodies/authorities to ensure future building designs have disability considerations. The MJCS in partnership with the Stretem Rod Blong Jastis (SRBLJ) Program developed a Justice and Policing Infrastructure Priorities Plan for 2017-2022 which is coordinated by the Sector Infrastructure Coordinator to ensure new buildings have access for people with disabilities.  By 2030 we expect at least a 50% increase in accessible buildings and other facilities. 
 
SOC 4.4:  Define the roles, responsibilities and relationships between the state, churches, traditional leaders and communities in safeguarding human rights and protecting traditional values and Christian principles (SDG Indicators 10.3.1, 16.a.1) 
Several actions have been taken in this policy area. As of 2017 3 UN Conventions had Periodic Reports submitted by the National Human Rights Committee (NHRC) UNCEDAW, UNCRC, UNCRPD. Additionally, Vanuatu’s UPR was presented October 2018.  Work regarding UN Treaties Reporting Mechanisms implementation is ongoing. Also, the preparation of outstanding reports for the UNICCPR and UNCAT were due for completion in June 2018.   Furthermore, eight UN Human Rights Conventions have been ratified including CEDAW, UNCRPD and UNCRC (full list in ADR.).  Finally, ongoing review of eight different pieces of legislation on the basis of discriminatory or gender bias is/has been conducted (see ADR). 
 
SOC 4.5:   Ensure all people, including people with disabilities, have access to government services, buildings and public spaces (SDG indicators 10.3) 
See SOC 4.3 above (NSDP Target for 2030, 50% increase) 
 
SOC 6.8:  Coordinate donor resources to align with national objectives (SDG Indicators 10.b.1, 16.6.1) Donor coordination, by both donors and Government is important to the successful implementation of both the NSDP and the meeting of SDG goals.  NSDP targets for 1) Percentage of aid the government sector reported on the government’s budget, 2) Percentage of aid for the government sector using Vanuatu government Public Financial Management (PFM) systems and, 3) Percentage of aid for the government sector using Vanuatu government procurement systems have been identified.  At this time no data is available regarding these indicators and targets. 
 
ECO 1.6: Require all new trade agreements to demonstrate tangible benefits in the national interest (SDG Indicators 10.a.1, 17.10.1) 
It is expected that a review of trade agreement analysis reports will provide information regarding benefits related to the national interest.  At this time the review is not yet completed.  Additionally, the estimated value of trade (as proportion of GDP) will also be reviewed.  The NSDP target is for a 15% increase by 2030. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 10, reducing inequality among countries, empowering disabled and vulnerable groups is a central factor to positive success.  Additionally, reviewing trade agreements for imbalances and coordinating donor funding will also provide foundation for reducing inequalities.   
 
In summary Vanuatu is making positive progress in the area of empowering people with disability, and it is expected that continual improvement with result from the implementation of the Justice and Policing Infrastructure Priorities Plan. Steady and positive progress is also evident through the Government actions regarding ratification of key UN Conventions and Policy documents (and further consideration of several others) and the updating of UN reporting documents such as the UPR.  Continued focus on donor coordination and use of funds, as well as trade agreements is expected to continue to provide positive foundation for improvements and reducing inequalities.  
 
SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
SDG Targets (Goal 11) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (11.2) (11.3) (11.6) (11.a) (11.b) (11.c)   
(SOC 1.1) (SOC 1.2) (SOC 1.3)  
(SOC 1.6) (SOC 1.7) SOC 6.6) 
(ENV 2.2) (ENV 2.4) (ENV 4.1) (ENV 4.7)  
(ECO 2.3) (ECO 2.4) (ECO 2.6)   
(ECO 2.7) (ECO 3.6) (ECO 4.2)   
 
SOC 1.1: Promote and protect indigenous languages (SDG Indicators 11.4.1)    
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the proportion of population first language learned being indigenous.  The current status is 92%.  Nearly 80% of Vanuatu’s population live in the island communities and the everyday language they use is the local vernacular/dialect.  A second NSDP indicators is the -proportion of population speaking indigenous language daily which is currently listed at 72%. A third NSDP indicator focuses on the proportion of endangered languages documented (target 50% by 2030).  Current status is 106 languages documented 8 extinct and 17 Moribund, with a total of 81 spoken languages in Vanuatu 
 
SOC 1.2: Preserve and enhance cultural and traditional knowledge, including appropriate medicines, natural remedies and healing practices (SDG Indicator, 11.4.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the proportion of population with knowledge of traditional stories, dances, songs, and games.  As of 2017 the status of knowledge of traditional Stories = 44%, Dances = 43%, Songs = 39%, Games = 39%.  There is a need for greater engagement in the promotion of traditional stories, dances, songs, and games.   The NSDP also includes indicators regarding proportion of population possessing common and basic traditional production skills related to weaving, transport, housing, farming, food preparation and the proportion of population with ability to produce herbal medicines, and traditional massage.  The percentages for these indicators are located in the 2017 ADR.  For the 80% of the population living in rural communities their daily living requires the common traditional skills to survive in the islands.   
 
SOC 1.3: Conserve sites of cultural and historical significance (SDG Indicator 11.4.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the total number of sites with cultural and/or historical significance newly identified, registered and preserved. The Preservation of Sites and Artefacts Act needs to be revised to ensure the efficient process of the registration of sites. It is still too lengthy and there is currently a review of the Act in progress.  
SOC 1.6: Integrate culture and heritage into the national curriculum (SDG Indicator 11.4.1) 
436 primary and 93 secondary schools have culture and heritage modules in the curriculum.  Schools also have extra curricula activities on culture & heritage (e.g. cultural nights; arts/crafts; etc.) annually. Additionally, both Kindergarten Primary (Yr.1-6) and Junior secondary (Yr.7-10) are developing new modules with the availability of resources (being developed in phases in accordance with funding available. Kindergarten and primary materials are being supported (financially, technically) by the Vanuatu Education Schools Project (VESP). While the Junior Secondary materials supported through Government recurrent fund 
 
SOC 1.7: Safeguard the traditional economy as a valued means of contributing to the wellbeing of the population and complementing the formal economy (SDG Indicator 11.4.1) 
The percentage of population with free access to traditional lands, forest and marine resources is currently listed as 79% from the Alternative Indicators and Well Being Module (AIWBM). Almost 80% of the population in Vanuatu still have access to and enjoy their traditional land and the forest and marine resources. However, as population increases, and with large parcels of land being bought off by foreign investors and developers this freedom could be reduced  
 
SOC 6.6: Strengthen physical planning and management to meet the service delivery needs of a growing population (SDG Indicators 11.a.1, 11.b.1) 
The NSDP target is to have at least 1 planner in each physical area and each area to have a corresponding plan.  Both Ministry of Internal Affairs (MOIA) and Ministry of Land and Natural Resources (MoLNR) are expected to provide further updates on progress 
 
ENV 2.2:  Ensure new infrastructure development activities cause minimal disturbance to the natural land and marine environment (11.c, 11.c.1) 
There are currently four environmental guidelines in place regarding infrastructure development activities.  These requirements will benefit the natural environment. Additionally, in 2017 there were 79 applicants that complied with Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) requirements for development projects  
 
ENV 2.4:   Reduce waste and pollution through effective waste management and pollution control (SDG Indicators 11.6.1, 11.6.2) 
The NSDP outlines that at least three provinces have a controlled waste disposal facility, however at this time there are none in operation in country. Vanuatu also plans to include vehicle emission standards as par to roadworthy inspections, but currently these are not yet in place.  The National Waste Management Strategy and Action Plan provides details for waste management,  
 
ENV 4.1:  Strengthen local authorities and municipal planning authorities to enact and enforce land use planning laws and regulations (SDG Indicators 11.a.1, 11.b.1, 11.b.2) 
As of 2017 both Luganville Town Municipal Council (LTMC) and Luganville Municipal Council (LMC) physical plans are completed and a draft PVMC physical plan is completed. In the drafting stage are Imailone and Tanasul (on Tanna), Lakatoro, Saratamata, Loltong, and Efate Physical Planning Area (PPA) are declared.   Additionally, the Land Use Policy directives are in place, and the 2025 target is that at least 50% of these directives are being implemented.  Currently there is no update on implementation. 
 
ENV 4.7:  Build capacity and support local communities to manage natural resources (11.3.2, 11.a.1) Capacity building and support to local communities will focus on Department of Environmental Protection and Conservation (DEPC) establishing provincial offices.  As of 2017 two offices have been established with an overall goal of 6 (1 in each province).  The transfer of Public Works Department (PWD) Water Section to the Department of Water (MoLNR) is completed.   
 
 
 
ECO 2.3: Ensure that all public infrastructure, including health, education and sports facilities are safe, accessible, secure and maintained in compliance with building codes and standards (SDG Indicators 9.1.1, 11.2.1) 
The NSDP policy objective includes monitoring both new and existing buildings (repairs) that are in compliance with building codes and standards with a goal of 100% compliance by 2030.  Currently we are collecting information on current building compliance levels. 
 
ECO 2.4: Enact clear infrastructure governance, legislative frameworks and standards for resilient infrastructure and maintenance (SDG Indicators 9.1.1, 11.2.1). 
The NSDP policy objective includes monitoring the proportion of road and building standards implemented with a goal of 100% by 2030.  Currently we are collecting information on current compliance levels. 
 
ECO 2.6: Provide equitable and affordable access to efficient transport in rural and urban areas (SDG Indicators 11.2.1) 
The NSDP focus is on the proportion of population with access to transport by road, sea and air with a target of 100% access by 2030. At this time there is no data reported on the level of access of the population. 
 
ECO 2.7:  Ensure compliance with international conventions and standards for safe and secure transport (SDG Indicators 11.2.1) 
External audits will be completed to establish compliance with conventions and standards and expose nonconformity.  At this time these audits must be scheduled for future implementation. 
 
ECO 3.6: Improve the provision of government services in rural areas (SDG Indicators (1.4.1, 11.a.1) 
Information regarding this policy objective is currently not reported (as of 2017).  In order to evaluate this Policy Objective government plans to track 1) Average traveling distance to nearest school, health facility, police post by province, and 2) Number of controlled waste disposal facilities. Currently this baseline data has yet to be established, however during the 2019 ADR and the NSDP Stock Take scheduled for 2020 we expect further clarifications regarding this information 
 
ECO 4.2:  Strengthen strong linkages between urban and rural business and trade between islands (11.a.1). Information on the proportion of rural households engaged in trade with family in urban centres will be monitored in order to measure progress.  The NSDP target for 2020 is and increase 10%, however the baseline has yet to be established.   
Summary 
With regard to SDG 11, making cities inclusive, safe and resilient, the NSDP focuses on environmental issues including waste management and environmental impact of development as well as management issues including urban planning and management and transportation issues. In these areas related to SDG 11 there is evidence of some but limited progress.  Additionally, preserving cultural sites, traditional languages and ways of life is important to the rural communities as impacts the inclusivity of the rural population.  The NSDP includes policy objectives and indicators which aim to promote and pre-service traditional languages and knowledge as a way of maintaining a resilient population  
 
In summary, Vanuatu has designed strong goals and targets related to SDG 11.  The implementation of The National Waste Management Strategy and Action Plan addresses urban waste management, providing cleaner and more liveable urban centres.  Additionally, the work underway in physical planning and land use will provide clear directions for urban management in the coming years. The establishment of DEPC provincial offices provides further coordination of provincial and national environmental protection efforts.  The planned transportation pollution standards will also help to provide cleaner urban centres. 
 
 
SDG 12:  Ensure Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns 
SDG Targets (Goal 12) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (12.2) (12.7) (12.8) (12.a)  
(SOC 6.5)  
(ENV 1.2) (ENV 1.4) (ENV 1.5) 
(ENV 4.2) (ENV 4.3)  
 
SOC 6.5:  Strengthen local authorities and municipal institutions to enable decentralised service delivery (SDG Indicators 12.7.1, 16.6.1). 
The NSDP includes and indicator on revising the annual budget going to Provinces, Municipalities towards 0perations/ programs or in other words “Devolution of funding authority”. In 2017 MOIA reported that the change to budget to Line Agencies is more than 10% due to GRT determination. There has been FSB established in all provinces for easy access.  MOIA indicates that progress is being made on the devolution of funds to provinces. MoLNR reported in 2017 that water services were decentralized to Santo, Water provincial offices.  In 2017 DLA reported that some Local Authorities have corporate plans) 
 
ENV 1.2:  Promote aelan kakae as a key part of a sustainable and nutritionally balanced diet (SDG Indicators 12.8.1) 
Several actions are in place supporting the NSDP Policy Objective.  Policy guidelines in place (“Gudfala Kakae Policy” has been adopted by the Govt as a guideline) as of 2017 (?). Also, the Slow Food Program established by the Vanuatu Cultural Centre as an annual slow food event to promotes traditional aelan kakae. There is a Vanuatu National Organic Policy in draft. A COM decision directed that food served at Government function at least 50% must be Aelan Kakae.  Finally, MALFFB has several annual events to promote Aelan Kakae (details found in 2017 ADR)) 
 
ENV 1.4:  Improve access to appropriate technology, knowledge and skills in food production, preservation and storage (SDG Indicators 12.8.1, 12.a.1, 14.4.1) 
MALFBB provides training in the area of food storage, food production and preservation.  NGOs also provide localised training at the village and provincial level in some provinces. Information on training provided (including numbers trained and type) are available in MALFBB 2017 annual report.  It is noted that 30% of MALFFB trainings are conducted jointly with the NGO. In reference to accessing technology 45 Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) have been deployed to assist local fisherman with catching fish. The listing by area is available with Fisheries. The 2030 target is for a total of 100 FADs to be in place.   
 
ENV 1.5: Enhance traditional agricultural practices, focusing on disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 12.8.1) 
As of 2017 trainings have been conducted by MALFFB.  It is noted that 30% of MALFFB trainings are conducted jointly with the NGO. It is expected that these will be ongoing in the coming years.  Furthermore, MALFBB implements integrated farming systems in all provinces, and this information is included int the 2017 annual report.  Additionally, an Agriculture Census is planned by VNSO as part of their 10-year survey plan. The establishment of a crop diversity index with a focus on fruit and vegetables (average number of varieties planted of crops by province) is planned.  Currently at the department level, technical index Information from VARTC is collected.  As of 2017 VNSO was asked to assist MALFBB with establishing a baseline for this index.  MALFBB does include, in the 2017 annual report the varieties of crops, (fruits and vegetables produced). 
 
ENV 4.2:  Protect vulnerable forests, watersheds, catchments and freshwater resources, including 
community water sources (SDG Indicators 12.2.1, 15.1.1, 15.1.2, 15.2.1, 15.3.1, 15.4.1, 15.4.2) 
Progress is being made in this area with 4 water zones protected (see ADR) as well as the Brenwa Hydro water dam.  The NSDP target is for 6 protected zones (Additionally, MALFFB is in the process of undertaking a National Forest inventory which will when completed will further assist in the management of natural resources. 
 
ENV 4.3:  Prevent land degradation and downstream environmental damage from mineral resource extraction (SDG Indicators 12.2.1, 15.1.1, 15.1.2, 15.2.1, 15.3.1, 15.4.1 15.4.2) 
The environmental impact of extraction activities is something to be monitored moving forward.  The target is to have at least 90% of extraction activities complying with EIA requirements). Although the baseline has yet to be completed (but should be available in 2018 ADR) there are sediment discharge reports for Teouma, La Colle and Tebakor rivers as well as completed assessment reports for SHEFA and SANMA.  Additionally, monitoring reports for Malekula and Tanna are available as per MoLNR. 
 
Summary 
In summary Vanuatu is making steady progress regarding SDG 12.  The policies and programs that are in place regarding aelan kakae, and the trainings on food preservation and storage provide solid support in regards to promoting sustainable consumption and production patterns. The implementation of integrated farming systems in all provinces is another positive program supporting sustainable production and the planned crop diversity index will further assist in the promotion of sustainable food production.  The establishment of the water protected zones and the Forestry Inventory also complement sustainable lifestyle patterns.  Ensuring that extraction activities are EIA compliant is also designed to promote environmentally safe and sustainable use and development of natural resources. Coordination between provincial and national government regarding sustainable use of resources will also provide positive results regarding sustainable patterns of consumption and production.  
 
SDG 13:  Take Urgent Action to Combat Climate Change and its Impacts 
SDG Targets (Goal 13) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (13.1) (13.2) (13.3) (13.a) (13.b) 
(ENV 2.5) (ENV 2.6) (ENV 3.1) 
(ENV 3.2) (ENV 3.3) (ENV 3.4) (ENV 3.5) (ENV 5.5) 
 
ENV 2.5:  Strengthen environmental institutions and governance to meet national and international obligations (SDG Indicators 13.2.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding meeting the targets detailed in The National Environment Policy and Implementation Plan 2016-2030.  Current work on the baseline (2017) but no reporting at that time.  The Policy has 135 targets, 61 of which specify target dates of 2020 or earlier.  We expect updates on these targets during this reporting period.  Vanuatu also plans to continue to review environmental obligations within international conventions and treaties to ensure obligations are met and that these updates are incorporated into Corporate Plans and reported on in Annual Reports. 
 
ENV 2.6:  Ensure adequate financial resources to support our sustainable development aspirations (SDG Indicators 13.a.1, 17.7.1) 
The NSDP outlines expenditure targets for sustainable development (Proportion of funding requested by DEPC in support of sustainable development approved through NPP/percentage of government expenditure for environmental activities).   As of 2017, there was VT35,173,849 spent, an increase of 5 million.  Additionally, the amount in the Environmental Trust Fund is to be tracked and reported on.  Currently the Trust fund exists on paper (in the Environmental Protection and Conservation Act [CAP 283]) only.  We expect further updates this reporting period. 
 
ENV 3.1:  Institutionalise climate change and disaster risk governance, and build institutional capacity and awareness (SDG Indicators 13.2.1)  
Most Ministries (10 out of 13) have sectoral policies for Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management, however annual budgets still need to reflect these policies and plans (2018).  Recruitment has been ongoing since 2017 for positions at Department of Climate Change (DoCC) and the National Advisory Board secretariat.  The issue of stakeholder awareness regarding CC and DRM policies and legislation needs to be addressed, and as of 2017 there was no information regarding this issue, this includes formal arrangements among sector stakeholders and government in the area of CC and DRM (Details found in 2017 ADR) 
ENV 3.2 Improve monitoring and early warning systems (SDG Indicators 13.1.1, 13.1.2, 13.3.1, 13.3.2) All 6 provinces have established automated and manual detection systems for climate related and volcanic hazards (11 weather stations, 7 earthquake seismic stations, 2 tide gauges and 6 volcano seismic stations). There are 19 tsunami warning sirens established on Port Vila and Luganville. VMGD employs 97 staff (2017). All 6 provinces have established Provincial Disaster Committees with full time Provincial Disaster Officers and over 200 Community Disaster Committees (CDCs) have been established by National Disaster Management Office (NDMO).  Additionally, 86% of households have access to mobile phone which can be used to convey early warning messages 
 
ENV 3.3   Strengthen post-disaster systems in planning, preparedness, response and recovery (SDG Indicators 13.b.1) 
As of 2017, all 6 provinces have provincial disaster plans articulating preparedness and response arrangements. Some communities/area councils have formulated disaster or development plans, however data on this limited (can we get the number). Additionally, a WASH coordinator recruited in 2017.  Furthermore, multi-hazard risk maps have been developed for Port Vila and Luganville, however hazard risk maps at present only cover one or two hazards e.g. volcano or earthquake. This is especially the case with provincial or island level maps  
 
ENV 3.4   Promote and ensure strengthened resilience and adaptive capacity to climate related, natural and man-made hazards (13.3, 13.3.1, 13.3.2) 
Progress is evident in this area as the national curriculum at all levels now incorporate climate and disaster modules.  This provides families with information regarding ongoing adaptation and resiliency efforts. Additionally, communication and partnership activities and awareness programs are being established targeting issues such as climate change adaptation and resilience.  The Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-Hazard Department (VMGD) with partners have undertaken communication or outreach activities. Through outreach programs with its provincial weather observations and rainfall networks communities have become well versed with climate change resilience related issues. This effort has also been supported through project initiatives such as Finance Pacific, Increasing Resilience to Climate Change and Natural Hazards Projects (IRCCNH) and Vanuatu Climate Action Project (VCAP). The South Pacific Environment Project (SPREP), International Global Climate Fund (IGCF) project rolled out 2017) targeted awareness activities relative to climate related hazards.  
 
ENV 3.5:  Access available financing for climate change adaptation and disaster risk management (SDG Indicators 13.a.1). 
Major projects such as the IRCCNH, Melanesia Disaster Risk Resilience Project (MDRR) and VCAP have channelled funding through the government system. This only constitutes to approximately 20% of all the NAB endorsed projects, and the NSDP target is for at least 50% of funding to be channelled through the government system for improved transparency, to better track and monitor results, and avoid duplication of effort.  Vanuatu is also working on accreditation regarding climate financing.  Accreditation process is still underway for both GCF and AF. There is currently a Readiness program in progress for the Green Climate Fund (GCF) as well.  Finally, the NSDP includes a target for climate funds (at least VT 10 billion) to be used for community programs and activities.  We find good progress as over VT 21 billion (2017) was approved for Climate Change (CC) related activities with approximately VT4 billion vatu used to address community needs. 
 
ENV 5.5:  Increase awareness on biodiversity conservation and environmental protection issues (SDG Indicators 13.3.1, 15.9.1)  
All primary (436 schools) and all secondary (93 schools) are implementing environmental programs.  The NSDP target states (At least one school in each province is an environment model school and environment ambassador).  Awareness levels should be considered positive and will continue to be positive 
 
Summary 
In summary Vanuatu is making steady progress regarding SDG 13.  Implementation of the The National Environment Policy and Implementation Plan 2016-2030 is underway and provides a clear roadmap for progress. Updates to implementation results are expected this year.  Spending, with a focus on the environment is outlined and underway at the national, provincial and local levels and an Environmental Trust Fund has been established. Ten of the 13 Ministries have sectoral policies for CC and DRM and are expected to align annual budgets accordingly. All six provinces have established automated and manual detection systems for climate related and volcanic hazards.  As of 2017, all six provinces have provincial disaster plans articulating preparedness and response arrangements. Some communities/area councils have formulated disaster or development plans.  The national curriculum at all levels now incorporates climate and disaster modules and all primary (436 schools) and all secondary (93 schools) are implementing environmental programs.   
 
SDG 14:  Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 
SDG Targets (Goal 14) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (14.2) (14.4) (14.5) (14.7) (14.b) 
(SOC 5.4) 
(ENV 1.1) (ENV 1.4) (ENV 4.4) (ENV 4.5) 
(ENV 5.2) (ENV 5.3) 
(ECO 3.3) 
 
SOC 5.4:  Protect our Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) through effective maritime security and monitoring (SDG Indicators 14.4.1)  
EEZ patrols occurred in 2017 (11) and 2018 (3).  Additional patrols (7) were conducted in 2017 with patrols continuing as scheduled in 2018 and 2019. 
 
ENV 1.1:     Increase agricultural and fisheries food production using sustainable practices to ensure sufficient access to affordable and nutritious food (SDG Indicators 2.3.1, 2.3.2, 2.4.1, 14.7.1) Information regarding this policy objective is not as current as it needs to be.  At this time Government is working to establish a baseline regarding the proportion of households engaged in food production for their own consumption.  It is expected this will be addressed in the 2018/19 census.  In the 2017 MALFFB provides up to date information on primary agriculture production some of the key results are progress regarding increased productivity for the following commodities; kava replanting, coconut replanting, coffee cultivation, cocoa cultivation, root cultivation. 
 
ENV 1.4:  Improve access to appropriate technology, knowledge and skills in food production, preservation and storage (SDG Indicators 12.8.1, 12.a.1, 14.4.1) 
MALFBB provides training in the area of food storage, food production and preservation.  Several NGOs also provide localised training at the village and provincial level, it is noted that 30% of MALFFB trainings are conducted jointly with NGOs. Information on training provided (including numbers trained and type) are available in the MALFBB 2017 annual report.  In reference to accessing technology 45 FADs have been deployed to assist local fisherman with catching fish. The listing by area available with Fisheries. The 2030 target is for a total of 100 FADs to be in place.   
 
ENV 4.4:  Promote the sustainable development of the fisheries sector that values the protection and conservation of marine and freshwater resources (SDG Indicators 14.4.1, 15.1.2) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the level of compliance by Vanuatu with respect to the national fishing fleet within the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations. As of 2017 a fleet management plan implementation in progress with a quota limit of 150 vessels per year.  Additionally, the NSDP includes efforts to develop and implement integrated coastal management plans (target of 40).  While information was not available in 2017 it is expected in the next reporting period.  Fisheries and Environment are organizing a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) to work in collaboration regarding strengthening Marine Protected Areas (MPA) and fisheries regulation. 
 
ENV 4.5:  Reduce and prevent the degradation and erosion of foreshore and coastal areas (SDG Indicators 
14.5.1) 
The NSDP target for 20 approved Fisheries Management Plans for designated Fisheries is partially complete, as 9 Fisheries Management Plans in place and 3 in progress from 2017.  Progress on other areas related to erosion including information on commercial sand mines, foreshore development permits and mapping of geo-scientific information collection areas has not yet been reported on. 
 
ENV 5.2:  Create and manage conservation and protected areas (SDG Indicators 14.2.1 15.1.1 15.1.2) From 2017 reporting there are five registered Community Conservation Areas (CCAs) as reported by DEPC and three water protected areas- Lakatoro, Lenakel, Matnakara as reported by MoLNR (The NSDP also includes a target regarding implementation of CCAs by community management committees, currently there is no baseline or reporting on this information. 
 
ENV 5.3:  Support local conservation and protection of endangered, threatened or endemic species and ecosystems including through traditional knowledge and practices (SDG Indicators 14.7.1, 15.5,1, 
15.9.1) 
IUCN Red List has 138 species (2017). Of this 138, 13 are legally protected (excluding CITES) in Vanuatu.  Efforts are ongoing to establish a baseline (by 2020) of the current understanding of traditional knowledge and practices.  Work on this is underway at VNSO. 
 
ECO 3.3:  Improve access to markets through quality infrastructure, utilities, storage and processing facilities in rural areas (SDG Indicators 9.3.1, 9.3.2, 14.b.1) 
In order to monitor this Policy Objective, we will focus on 1) Total number of standard operational storage and processing facilities located in rural areas by province, 2) Rate of Return to investments in rural infrastructure and, 3) Rate of Return to investments in rural infrastructure.  Targets for 2030 have been set in the NSDP M&E Framework, however Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities has noted that they will need assistance from VNSO to establish the monitoring information. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 14, the NSDP focuses on food production storage and preservation as well as protecting the EEZ and establishing marine protected areas and encouraging sustainable fishing.  In summary Vanuatu is making steady progress regarding SDG 14.  Ongoing training by MALFBB promoting sustainable food production (food production storage and preservation) continues and is providing information to all stakeholders.  Work continues on establishing a baseline for household food production (2018/19).  The Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is patrolled on a regular basis protecting Vanuatu marine resources from illegal activity.  Additionally, the implementation of the National Fisheries Fleet Management Plan provides direction for sustainable use of fishing resources and nine fisheries management plans (for specific fisheries) are completed.  Vanuatu protects 13 species currently listed on the IUCN Red List. 
 
SDG 15:  Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 
SDG Targets (Goal 15) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (15.1) (15.2) (15.3) (15.4) (15.5) (15.8) (15.9) (15.a) 
(ENV 2.1) (ENV 4.2) (ENV 4.3) (ENV 4.4) 
(ENV 4.6) (ENV 5.1) (ENV 5.2)  
(ENV 5.3) (ENV 5.4) (ENV 5.5) (ENV 5.6) 
 
 
 
 
ENV 2.1:  Increase access to knowledge, expertise and technology to enact our blue-green growth strategies (SDG Indicators 7.a.1, 15.9.1, 15.a.1) 
Vanuatu, as part of the NSDP will design and implement national policies that are “blue-green growth friendly”.  By 2030 it is planned that 100% of all new development projects will be designed as “green” infrastructure projects.  This forward-looking policy will be implemented throughout the life of the NSDP 
 
ENV 4.2:  Protect vulnerable forests, watersheds, catchments and freshwater resources, including community water sources (SDG Indicators 12.2.1, 15.1.1, 15.1.2, 15.2.1, 15.3.1, 15.4.1, 15.4.2) Progress is being made in this area with 4 water zones protected (see ADR) as well as the Brenwei Hydro water dam.  The NSDP target is for 6 protected zones.  Additionally, MALFFB is in the process of undertaking a National Forest inventory which will when completed will assist in the management of natural resources. 
 
ENV 4.3:  Prevent land degradation and downstream environmental damage from mineral resource extraction (SDG Indicators 12.2.1, 15.1.1, 15.1.2, 15.2.1, 15.3.1, 15.4.1 15.4.2) 
The environmental impact of extraction activities is something to be monitored moving forward.  The target is to have at least 90% of extraction activities complying with EIA requirements by Although the baseline has yet to be completed (but should be available in 2018 ADR) there are sediment discharge reports for Teouma, La Colle and Tebakor rivers as well as completed assessment reports for SHEFA and SANMA.  Additionally, monitoring reports for Malekula and Tanna are available as per MoLNR. 
 
ENV 4.4:  Promote the sustainable development of the fisheries sector that values the protection and conservation of marine and freshwater resources (SDG Indicators 14.4.1, 15.1.2) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the level of compliance by Vanuatu with respect to the national fishing fleet within the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations. As of 2017 a fleet management plan implementation in progress with a quota limit of 150 vessels per year.  Additionally, the NSDP includes efforts to develop and implement integrated coastal management plans (target of 40).  While information was not available in 2017 it is expected in the next reporting period.  Fisheries and Environment are organizing an MOU to work in collaboration regarding strengthening Marine Protected Areas (MPA) and fisheries regulation 
 
ENV 4.6:  Reduce deforestation and ensure rehabilitation and reforestation is commonplace (SDG Indicators 15.2, 15.2.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding logging.  Currently Logging Monitoring is very limited with about 20% compliance with license condition reported in 2017.  The NSDP also includes a target on reforestation and rehabilitation with a target of 20,000 ha of planted forests by 2020.  At this time there is no information reported regarding reforestation efforts. 
 
ENV 5.1:  Protect biodiversity and ecosystems and their significant role in our culture, society and environment (SDG Indicators 15.9.1) 
The NSDP includes a target regarding environmental guidelines, currently six environmental guidelines are in place).  Additionally, the NSDP target is for 90% of the activities in the National Biodiversity Strategy Action Plan (NBSAP) National Implementation Strategy and Action Plan (NISSAP) are implemented, currently we cannot monitor this implementation as the baseline has not been established. 
 
ENV 5.2:  Create and manage conservation and protected areas (SDG Indicators 14.2.1 15.1.1 15.1.2) 
From 2017 reporting there are five registered CCAs as reported by DEPC and three water protected areas- Lakatoro, Lenakel, Matnakara as reported by MoLNR.  The NSDP also includes a target regarding implementation of CCAs by community management committees, currently there is no baseline or reporting on this information. 
 
ENV 5.3:  Support local conservation and protection of endangered, threatened or endemic species and ecosystems including through traditional knowledge and practices (SDG Indicators 14.7.1, 15.5,1, 
15.9.1) 
IUCN Red List has 138 species (2017). Of this 138, 13 are legally protected (excluding CITES) in Vanuatu. Efforts are ongoing to establish a baseline (by 2020) of the current understanding of traditional knowledge and practices.  Work on this is underway at VNSO. 
 
ENV 5.4:  Protect our borders and environment through effective customs and biosecurity services (SDG Indicators 15.8.1) 
The NSDP includes indicators and targets for proportion of incoming planes and sea vessels cleared through 
Biosecurity annually.  The targets are 100% of international flight arrivals and 70% of international sea craft   
 
ENV 5.5:  Increase awareness on biodiversity conservation and environmental protection issues (SDG Indicators 13.3.1, 15.9.1)  
All primary (436 schools) and all secondary (93 schools) are implementing environmental programs.  The NSDP target states (At least one school in each province is an environment model school and environment ambassador).  Awareness levels should be considered positive and will continue to be positive 
ENV 5.6:  Enhance environmental monitoring, evaluation and research with relevant, open and transparent data sharing among relevant agencies (SDG Indicators 15.9.1, 15.a.1) 
Through a UNDP supported project at DEPC, work began in 2018 to develop a central database for all environmental related project information. The system is now in place with plans to expand in 2019 to include all other environmental related data from other agencies. 
 
Summary 
In summary Vanuatu is making some but limited progress regarding SDG 15. The establishment of the water protected zones and the Forestry Inventory contribute to sustainable terrestrial resources as does ensuring that extraction activities are EIA compliant.  Monitoring of logging activities and related re-forestation plans provide a foundation for ensuring sustainability of forests and forest resources.  The establishment of CCAs, and community level implementation broadens the foundation for protecting the environment.  Additionally, the implementation of the National Fisheries Fleet Management Plan provides direction for sustainable use of fishing resources and nine fisheries management plans (for specific fisheries) are completed.  Vanuatu protects 13 species currently listed on the IUCN Red List.  
 
SDG 16:  Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
SDG Targets (Goal 16) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (16.2) (16.3) (16.5) (16.6) (16.7) (16.10 (16.a) 
(SOC 1.4) 
(SOC 4.4) (SOC 4.6) 
(SOC 5.1) (SOC 5.2) (SOC 5.5) 
(SOC 6.1) (SOC 6.3) (SOC 6.4) (SOC 6.5) 

(SOC 6.7) (SOC 6.8) 
 
SOC 1.4: Strengthen links between traditional and formal governance systems (SDG Indicators 16.6.2, 16.7.2) 
The NSDP includes a target regarding the number/proportion of relevant bills (land, culture, and environment) that are reviewed by MCC prior to parliamentary debate.  As of 2017 the bills that have gone through Malvatumauri Council of Chiefs (MCC) for review are; 1) National Council of Chiefs’ Act 2) Consultations on Corrections Amendment Bill, 3) Consultation on Adoption Bill, 4) Customary Land Management Act. 
 
SOC 4.4:  Define the roles, responsibilities and relationships between the state, churches, traditional leaders and communities in safeguarding human rights and protecting traditional values and Christian principles (SDG Indicators 10.3.1, 16.a.1) 
Several actions have been taken in this policy area. As of 2017 3 UN Conventions had Periodic Reports submitted by the (NHRC) UNCEDAW, UNCRC, UNCRPD. Additionally, Vanuatu’s UPR was presented October 2018.  Work regarding UN Treaties Reporting Mechanisms implementation is ongoing. Also, the preparation of outstanding reports for the UNICCPR and UNCAT were due for completion in June 2018.   Furthermore, eight UN Human Rights Conventions have been ratified including CEDAW, UNCRPD and UNCRC (full list in ADR.).  Finally, ongoing review of eight different pieces of legislation on the basis of discriminatory or gender bias is/has been conducted (see ADR). 
 
SOC 4.6:  Provide opportunities, support and protection services for youth and children as valued members of society (SDG Indicators 16.2.1) 
The NSDP policy objective includes an indicator regarding children and human rights violations recorded including sexual abuse, neglect, physical abuse, exploitation, emotional abuse.  In the most recent ADR, it was reported that 78% (of adults admitted to physically harming a child in their household and 35% of people are aware of corporal punishment at school (Protect Me with Love and Care: Baseline Study Vanuatu 2008) 
 
SOC 5.1:  Ensure all people have timely and equitable access to independent, well-resourced justice institutions (SDG Indicators 16.3.1) 
Vanuatu has in place a Justice and Community Services Sector Capacity Development Strategy 2017-2020.   
As of 2017: Some activities that have been implemented under the Strategy are; 1: Capacity Development Support by the Hub to the Sector through Sector Networks (Finance, HR and M&E) 2: SRBJS  Program Capacity Building Support for Justice and Community Services 3: Building Community Partnerships Program 4: Management Development Program 5: Long Term University Studies 6: Short Term Trainings 7: Vocational Study Support Scheme8: Legal Policy Development Training.  The NSDP also includes an indicator regarding average cost of legal fees as a way of measuring access to justice and justice institutions. As of 2017: Public Solicitor’s Officer = 2,000vt per case, Private Lawyers = 10,000vt per hour. Court Filing Fees: Magistrates: 8,000vt Supreme Court: 20,000vt.  This indicates costs are relatively high for the majority of the population. 
 
SOC 5.2:  Establish and implement a National Anti-Corruption Framework (SDG Indicators 16.5.1, 16.5.2) The Anti-Corruption Committee is established, however no data on actions was reported in the ADR 
 
SOC 5.5:  Strengthen links between traditional and formal justice systems and the role of chiefs in maintaining peace and stability (SDG Indicators 16.7.2) 
Police community engagement is ongoing.  Crime statistics offer an insight into the level of activity of police in and around communities. In 2017, there were 122 community engagement meetings through police awareness program.  Additionally, (Police Assistance 619), 1,717 crime scenes visited, and 6,939 patrols conducted.  There were also 70 mediation and meeting conducted with the communities   Police reports also show 4,826 incidents of vandalism reported in 2017. 
 
SOC 6.1: Enhance the capacity and accountability of public officials, and ensure the impartiality and effectiveness of performance management systems (SDG indicators 16.6.1, 16.6.2) 
Data indicates accountability of public officials is positive as there were 3 disciplinary cases closed for 2016-17 by the Employment Disciplinary Board. However, this does not provide enough data to determine accountability as there may be unreported cases.   In 2017 48 staffs received qualifications from VIPAM, University of South Pacific (USP) & CNS Limited (private training Institute) in various areas including management, accounting, HR and IT.  The Vanuatu Institute of Performance and Management (VIPAM) is the training arm of the PSC. 
 
SOC 6.3:  Enact political reforms that promote stability, accountability, constituency representation and civic engagement (SDG Indicators 16.7.2) 
In the last election 114,292 (57%) of total registered voters reported to have voted in last election. When asked about the assessment of their local elected officials 31,000 votes responded that they had a positive assessment of their elected officials.  This data indicates an above average level of civic engagement and a positive view from constituents of public officials. 
 
SOC 6.4:  Strengthen national institutions to ensure that are cost-effective and well-resourced to deliver quality public services (SDG Indicators 16.6.1) 
The NSDP and the National Planning Framework provide a foundation for strengthening the capacity of national institutions to provide quality public services.  Ministerial Annual Reports were submitted for 2016 and business plans for all Departments were submitted for 2016 and 2017.  Review of reports and budgets will continue in an effort to meet this policy objective.  
 
SOC 6.5:  Strengthen local authorities and municipal institutions to enable decentralised service delivery (SDG Indicators 12.7.1, 16.6.1). 
The NSDP includes an indicator on revising the annual budget going to Provinces, Municipalities towards 0perations/ programs or in other words “Devolution of funding authority”. In 2017 MOIA reported that the change to budget to Line Agencies is more than 10% due to GRT determination. There has been FSB established in all provinces for easy access.  MOIA indicates that progress is being made on the devolution of funds to provinces. MoLNR reported in 2017 that water services were decentralized to Santo and, Water provincial offices.  Through the National Implementation Plan for Safe and Secure Water (NIP), Provincial Water Advisor Councils are being formed to further decentralise DoWR support to community drinking water systems. In 2017 DLA reported that some Local Authorities have corporate plans  
 
SOC 6.7:  Guarantee the public’s right to information (SDG Indicators 16.10.1, 16.10.2) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the proportion of population utilising media outlets for news including: newspapers, mobile phones, radio, television, and interne.  In 2017 MoLNR launched Ministry website.  Also land rents due date messages are sent through Digicel network. The ICT Policy was launched in 2016 and also a “One stop shop” usage TIS.  The NSDP sets targets (2030) for media access as follows radio100%, Newspapers – 60%, TV – 60%, Internet – 60%, – 100% mobile phone ownership (15 years age and up).   
 
SOC 6.8:  Coordinate donor resources to align with national objectives (SDG Indicators 10.b.1, 
16.6.1) 
Donor coordination, by both donors and Government is important to the successful implementation of both the NSDP and the meeting of SDG goals.  NSDP targets for 1) Percentage of aid the government sector reported on the government’s budget, 2) Percentage of aid for the government sector using Vanuatu government PFM systems and, 3) Percentage of aid for the government sector using Vanuatu government procurement systems have been identified.  At this time no data is available regarding these indicators and targets. 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG Goal 16, promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, strengthening linkages among the various levels of government, defining roles for government, churches and traditional leaders and decentralising some government functions is at the forefront of NSDP objectives aligned with SDG Goal 16.  Equitable access to justice institutions and accountable public officials are also important to progress related to this SDG Goal as is equitable access to information which ensures a wellinformed population. 
 
In summary Vanuatu is making steady progress regarding SDG 16. The implementation of Justice and Community Services Sector Capacity Development Strategy 2017-2020 provides a strong foundation for ensuring equitable access to justice and legal institutions. The process bills being reviewed by MCC prior to parliamentary debate continues to link traditional and formal governance systems.  Vanuatu has ratified several UN conventions and treaties which commit the Government to safeguarding human rights.  The devolution of funding authority has focused on the strengthening of local authorities to provide delivery of services at a level closer to the people. Vanuatu is committed to coordinating donor resources to align with National Objectives as part of the NSDP and meeting the SDGs.  
 
SDG 17:  Strengthen the Means of Implementation and Revitalize the Global 
Partnership for Sustainable Development 
SDG Targets (Goal 17) 
NSDP Alignment/Policy Objective 
Targets (17.1) (17.4) (17.5) (17.7) (17.8) 
(17.9) (17.10) (17.11) (17.12) 
(17.17) *17.18)  
(SOC 6.9) 
(ENV 2.6) 
(ECO 1.2) (ECO 1.3) (ECO 1.4) (ECO 1.5) 
(ECO 1.6) (ECO 2.8) (ECO 2.9) (ECO 3.1) (ECO 3.2) (ECO 4.1) 
(ECO 4.8) (ECO 4.9) 
   
SOC 6.9:  Strengthen research, data and statistics for accountability and decision-making (SDG Indicators 
17.9.1 17.18.1, 17.18.2) 
Currently the information regarding progress of the NSDP Policy Objectives is collected from the relevant sources and reported annually in the ADR.  The first ADR was completed in 2018.  A stock-take review of the NSDP targets and indicators is scheduled for 2020, 2025 and 2030.  By 2030 the target is for at least 75% of the NSDP Policy Objectives to be achieved. 
 
ENV 2.6:  Ensure adequate financial resources to support our sustainable development aspirations (SDG Indicators 13.a.1, 17.7.1) 
The NSDP outlines expenditure targets for sustainable development (Proportion of funding requested by DEPC in support of sustainable development approved through NPP/percentage of government expenditure for environmental activities).   As of 2017, there was VT35, 173,849 spent, an increase of 5 million.  Additionally, the amount in the Environmental Trust Fund is to be tracked and reported on.  Currently the Trust fund exists on paper (in the Environmental Protection and Conservation Act [CAP 283]) only.  We expect further updates this reporting period. 
 
ECO 1.2:  Improve government revenue generation (SDG Indicators 17.1.1, 17.1.2) 
In 2017 MoLNR reported an increase in revenue collected from department of lands, water, mines and minerals since 2015.  The Ministry of Finance and Economic Management (MFEM) (2017) reported an increase from 25,720 to 29,366 (millions of vatu) (65% increase) as a result of Value Added Tax (VAT) increases and wage increases. 
 
ECO 1.3:  Ensure public debt is sustainably managed and finances are directed towards projects with positive economic returns (SDG Indicators 17.4.1) 
Currently Government debt is be well managed. Government recorded a VT 1.7 billion surplus in 2017 budget while public debt was recorded at 33% of GDP (2030 target of less than 30%). 
 
ECO 1.4:  Increase trade and investment opportunities and reduce barriers, including through the use of Aidfor-Trade (SDG Indicators 8.a.1, 7.12.1) 
The value of national/merchandise trade increased from 39,989 to 41,408 (millions, vatu) in 2017. The NSDP target for 2030 is an increase of 20% (Additionally, the NSDP sets a target of 20% improvement for the current accounts balance charge In 2017 data was not available to measure evaluate this figure. 
 
ECO 1.5:  Increase access to markets for Vanuatu exports (SDG 17.11.1)  
Despite cyclone PAM there has been a slight increase in exports with an Increase from 26,612 to 40,754 of total exports (millions, vatu).  Additionally, in 2017 there was an increase from 4,249 to 5,446 (millions, vatu) by trade agreement.  
 
ECO 1.6: Require all new trade agreements to demonstrate tangible benefits in the national interest (SDG Indicators 10.a.1, 17.10.1) 
It is expected that a review of trade agreement analysis reports will provide information regarding benefits related to the national interest.  At this time the review is not yet completed.  Additionally, the estimated value of trade (as proportion of GDP) will also be reviewed.  The NSDP target is for a 15% increase by 2030. 
 
ECO 2.8:  Establish effective partnerships that facilitate the development of the private sector and rural communities as service suppliers in the provision of transport and the infrastructure sector (SDG Indicators 17.17.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the proportion of procurement contracts issued for Island Based Contractors, Community Based Contractors.  Currently no data is available regarding this indicator. 
 
ECO 2.9:  Increase use of and access to information and communications technologies, including on-line government services (SDG Indicators 9.c.1, 17.8.1) 
Access to broadband connections and the annual change in total users for on-line government services will be monitored regarding progress of this Policy Objective.  The target is for 100% broadband connections by 2030 and for a total of 80% of on line users of government services  
 
ECO 3.1: Promote broad-based growth by strengthening linkages between tourism, infrastructure, agriculture and industry in rural areas and diversity the rural economy (SDG Indicators 8.9.1, 8.9.2, 17.17.1) 
The number of businesses participating in the annual agri-tourism festival by sector is a good indicator of the successful coordination of tourism, infrastructure and agriculture.  In 2017 there were 56 participating associations and cooperatives in the festival (see ADR for list).  The target is to see an overall increase of at least 20% participation in this festival.  Additionally, we will monitor the total annual value of tourism industry, infrastructure, agricultural production and industry as a proportion of GDP, with a target of 40% increase by 2020.  At this time baseline data is being collected. 
 
ECO 3.2:  Deepen the integration of the tourism sector into the rural economy to spread opportunities to rural communities (SDG Indicators 8.9.1, 8.9.2, 17.17.1) 
In 2017 the number of visitors traveling to outer islands was over 43,000 (breakdown included in ADR).  This is the baseline use to monitor this indicator as the NSDP targets a 10% increase through 2030.  This coincides with tourism air and sea arrivals in 2017 with (37,779 sea arrivals and 12,283 air arrivals (VNSO).   The 2030 target is for an increase of 30% in total arrivals.  Tourism contributions to the economy are significant and the continued integration into the overall economy (both urban and rural) is critical to continued economic growth.  This is further evident in that as of 2017 there are a reported 161 guest houses, 876 handicraft shops and 132 bus tour operators registered as doing business (full listing in ADR).   
 
ECO 4.8:  Ensure processes for acquiring and using land for economic activity provides a stable platform for investment and business growth (SDG Indicators 2.3.1 5.a.1, 17.5.1) 
As per the NSDP, Vanuatu plans to establish a database of the annual number of new businesses registered by type.  At this time this is still in progress.  There is information available regarding business registration that can be currently used to gauge, to a limited extent, ongoing investment and business growth  
 
ECO 4.9:  Strengthen dialogue between government and the private sector, and enact a robust governance framework for effective partnership (17.7, 17.7.1) 
The NSDP includes an indicator regarding the total number of public/private joint ventures in operation. As of the 2017 ADR the following is reported (2016) (JV Local 21) (JV Other 10) 2017 (JV Local 15) (JV Other 15). 
 
Summary 
With regard to SDG 17, good financial management and promoting economic activities in all sectors are important for Vanuatu.  Specifically, monitoring NSDP progress through the NSDP M&E Framework, using financial resources to promote sustainable environmental development, economic activity (tourism and promoting rural economic development) and managing debt are critical to success regarding SDG Goal 17 
 
The NSDP data collection for the Annual Development Report ensures all ministries remained focus on the National Goals and targets.  Increasing revenue generation so that we have adequate resources for development needs is showing progress over the past year, as is management of debt.  New sources of revenue generation are being explored as well.  The establishment of linkages between tourism, infrastructure, agriculture and industry in rural areas is seen through the number of businesses participating in the annual agri-tourism festival. Additionally, the number of visitors traveling to outer islands is increasing and this will be monitored moving forward.  Fostering strong private sector growth is an essential element of the NSDP Policy Objectives aligned with SDG Goal 17, and we expect to see progress over the coming years as a result of increasing tourism and integration of tourism with the rural economies in the outer islands.  However, until the 2020 stock take is completed it is difficult to assess progress at current time. 
 
 	 
7. Next Steps 	 
 
It is the intention of Government to continue to improve the alignment of planning with resource allocation.  One way to do this will be the continued development of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) that links the NSDP (The Plan) with the budget process (as outlined in the NPF).  This MTEF will also provide for improving the linkages among the annual budget statement, the NSDP and sector/corporate plans. 
 
A continued focus on strengthening multi-stakeholder engagement (as has been seen throughout the NSDP process) is another area that Government will address.  This will ensure all stakeholders, including non-state actors have a role in implementing development programmes.  
 
Government expects to use this VNR has a foundation for moving forward with the NSDP Stock-Take in 2020 and will use this report and the presentation as an opportunity to strengthen linkages with donor partners in as a way of strengthening policy-making at all levels of government. 
 
As detailed in earlier sections of this report, the SDGs reporting is integrated into the Vanuatu NSDP through the NSDP M&E Framework.  The Annual Development Report (ADR) provides annual update on the NSDP indicators, and these indicators are aligned with SDG targets and indicators.  In some areas including Health and Education the SDG indicators are used as NSDP indicators. 
 
In 2020 the Government of Vanuatu is planning the first stock-take of the progress of the NSDP.  This stock take is scheduled at five-year intervals (2020, 2025 and 2030).  During this stock take a review of progress (using the ADR results from 2018 and 20190) a review of NSDP targets and indicators, and the SDG targets and indicators aligned within the NSDP M&E Framework will be completed. 
 
This stock take review process is expected to include the following; 
• ADR Overview (3-year progress)  
• Review and revise NSDP targets and indicators as needed 
• Are there some indicators where data is not available, if so, do we revise? 
• Review SDG Alignment with NSDP M&E Framework 
• Are there additional alignment that can be seen? 
• Are there alignments that need to be removed? 
• Review available baselines for both NSDP and SDG Indicators   
• Review planned or ongoing data collection efforts like Agriculture Census, HIES or others 
• NSDP Baseline Survey (VNSO) to be conducted from January 2019 through January 2020.  We expected raw data to be available for review in preparation for the 2020 Stock Take 
 
Once the stock take is completed the NSDP targets and indicators will be revisited and updates will be completed to ensure realistic progress can be assessed.  This stock take will also influence sector plans, corporate planning and annual business planning to ensure that all planning and reporting is aligned as per the National Planning Framework, and the National M&E Policy.   
 
The Plan has as its foundation, the people and culture of Vanuatu.  Government will seek to ensure this continues to be a focus of policymaking efforts through the implementation of the NSDP and the realisation of the SDG goals and targets.  
 
 
 
 
 
 	 
8. Conclusion 	 
 
The VNR is considered as a building block for ongoing (and regular) review of the NSDP implementation progress.  This includes ongoing review of the status and progress regarding the SDGs integrated and aligned into the NSDP. This VNR report illustrates for Government, the importance of a strong reporting process.  Vanuatu has designed the planning and reporting framework to ensure that progress of the NSDP and related SDGs can be effectively monitored and evaluated at all levels of government (national, sector, ministry, local).  This includes the realization that the linking of planning and budgeting is critical to success.   Some of the lessons learned through the VNR process (and the ongoing ADR process)  
• The VNR process has provided an opportunity to strengthen stakeholder coordination for NSDP implementation (private sector, NGOs, faith-based group, local governments)  
• The VNR process demonstrates the need for a strong sector-wide approach to planning and reporting in order to ensure all needed inputs are available  
• Ensure all partners and stakeholders are included from the early stages of planning and reporting 
• Strengthened planning and planning processes are critical to achieving the goals and targets of the NSDP and by alignment the SDG goals and targets 
• While the SDGs are a set of global targets, it is important that these can be integrated and put in local context in order to align planning and budgeting at the national level with Vanuatu’s international commitments  
• The VNR process highlights how Vanuatu is integrated into the regional context of development with a focus on culture, people, society and environment  
 
SDGs must be localised in order to be Meaningful for Vanuatu 
Through the VNR validation workshop (review of VNR draft) input on each of the SDGs was provided by Government and Non-government stakeholders.  Below we focus on SDG 1 Government and NGO Inputs. 
 
What is Poverty? 
Poverty is hardship. It exists in Vanuatu but perhaps in a different perspective than what is considered poverty in other countries.  If poverty is defined as living on $1 per day (UN definition) than we do not have poverty in Vanuatu.  In Vanuatu people depend mainly on the land for food (80% of population is rural) and not so much money, therefore the UN definition of poverty does not easily apply.   
 
Government Feedback 
World Bank definition of poverty is hardship and vulnerability. UNDP report also define poverty as hardship. 
However, many Ni-Vanuatu people are facing hardships in terms of what we have and what we do not have.  Poverty equals hardship (or lack of money in other countries).  Hardship in Vanuatu in different forms, but much of hardship is lack of access.  Lack of access to education, land, transportation, communications and sanitation would be some ways to define hardship in Vanuatu.  One way to address poverty in Vanuatu is to invest in education which in then will provide employment for the people.  We can also  
• Increase agricultural extension services to rural areas  
• Create investment for those who lack access to finance 
• Encourage people to invest on their land  
• Give people opportunities to gain skills (for those who lack access to formal education) that are transferable in rural areas (Rural Training Centres).  
 
NGO Feedback 
Poverty must be contextualised for Vanuatu.   Key challenges regarding “poverty” in Vanuatu are literacy rates for youth and opportunities for youth to be gainfully employed.  Both of these issues highlight the fact that poverty in Vanuatu can be tied to lack of access.  In this case the NGO stakeholders focus on the lack of access to education, leading to low literacy rates, and lack of employment opportunities.  
Lesson Learned from VNR 
The stakeholder input regarding SDG 1 is just one example of the difficulty of localising SDGs and designing meaningful policies to address the issues defined by the SDGs.  The validation workshop did provide another opportunity to continue to include all stakeholders in the ongoing process of development in Vanuatu.  The design and development of the VNR is yet another opportunity to gather inputs from all government and nongovernment stakeholders regarding sustainable and equitable development in Vanuatu. 
 
The VNR process has provided insights so that moving forward Vanuatu can look at an international issue and work to design national and local solutions through our own NSDP and other planning tools.  
