

I. INTRODUCTION

Three years have gone by since the 2015 United Nations Sustainable. Since then, Mexico has undertaken major transformations to move towards a development model that harmonizes social inclusion, environmental protection and economic growth. Achieving the SDGs requires innovation and forces us to think and act differently. For Mexico, to leave no one behind has meant understanding the SDGs in a comprehensive and holistic fashion, exploring methods to integrate human rights and gender approaches and utilizing participatory implementation mechanisms. These elements define Mexicois vision for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, representing the enduring path by means of which the country will advance towards 2030 and onward into the future.
Mexicois first Voluntary National Review (VNR), from 2016, presented the preparatory measures aimed at creating an adequate environment for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It also mentioned the steps to be taken to ensure adoption and compliance in Mexico.
This second VNR seeks to reflect the advances, challenges and lessons learned from the first three years of the 2030 Agenda. The participation of all social actors and levels of government is necessary to confront current challenges and assume the Agenda as a state commitment. For this reason, this review is not limited to the actions of the government. It also presents the contributions of a variety of actors that are key to sustainable development.
This review includes an overview of the opportunities and challenges of implementing the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. In particular, the \0xECReview of Goals section contains advances, emblematic actions and challenges. The valuable contributions of CSOs and the United Nations System are summarized in boxes labeled \0xECComplementary Positions for SDG X Expressed in the Review Process. The data and sources included therein are the responsibility of the participants.



II. DESIGN OF THE 
VOLUNTARY NATIONAL 

REVIEW
The monitoring and review of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda has meant recognizing challenges and sharing best practices and lessons learned. As one of the 47 countries that will present its VNR at the 2018 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (HLPF), Mexico seeks to contribute to a global dialogue that allows us to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
The objective of this review is to describe the path that Mexico has taken in implementing the 2030 Agenda at the national and subnational levels; it details the domestic progress made on each of the 17 SDGs and contributes to the domestic dissemination and adoption of the 2030 Agenda.
While the Office of the President of the Republic (OPR) coordinated the preparation of this document, it includes valuable contributions from other sectors, which were the product of an enriching dialogue among federal agencies, CSOs, representatives of the private sector, scientists, academics, the United Nations System and members of vulnerable populations.



III. MEASURES AND 
COMMITMENTS FOR  
THE IMPLEMENTATION  
OF THE 2030 AGENDA

3.1 INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
Ensuring the continuity of efforts over the long term is essential to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Nevertheless, factors such as changes of government, legal and budgetary restrictions and temporary contingencies can jeopardize continuity.
To address this challenge, Mexico has made it a priority to guarantee the continuity of the 2030 Agenda over time, creating new planning, implementation and follow-up mechanisms and transforming national and subnational institutions.
Some of these measures have included the transformation of the Specialized Technical Committee for the Millennium Development Goals (CTESIODM) into the Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals (CTEODS) in late 2015, the creation of the Senate Working Group for Monitoring the Legislative Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, the creation of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in April 2017, and the creation of implementation and follow-up agencies (OSIs) for the SDGs at the state and municipal levels. 
Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals
In November 2015, the INEGI Governing Board modified an agreement establishing the CTEODS as the body responsible for generating and following up on the data and indicators needed to monitor the implementation of the SDGs. The CTEODS is chaired by the Office of the President and brings together 29 federal entities.
This committee has worked to monitor global indicators for Mexico in accordance with its statistical capacity. This process required the characterization of indicators and the organization of 15 interinstitutional working groups for the technical analysis of each. To facilitate online access to these indicators, the CTEODS nin collaboration with the OPRis National Digital Strategy Departmentn designed the open data platform www.agenda2030.mx (see Appendix 1).
The process of defining national goals and indicators is currently in the review and reflection stage, which forms part of the preparation of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Senate Working Group for Monitoring 
the Legislative Implementation of the 
SDGs
In September 2016, the Senate Working Group for Monitoring the Legislative Implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals was created, which has connections to over 30 congressional committees. This group has organized awareness and training forums on the Agenda that are aimed at legislators and has developed a diagnostic on the legislative capacity to address the 2030 Agenda in Mexico.
National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
The decree creating the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was published in the Official Gazette of the Federation on April 26, 2017 and the Council held its first meeting that same day.
This mechanism aims to coordinate the design, execution, follow-up and evaluation of actions implementing the SDGs.2 This Council is the highest decision-making body, as it connects the executive, legislative and judicial branches of the federal government with local governments, the private sector, civil society and academia. Chaired by the president, it has an executive secretary in the OPR. It includes multisectoral working groups specializing in the 17 SDGs as grouped into four thematic axes (Free, Healthy and Safe People; Prepared, Productive and Innovative People; People Committed to Cities, Nature and the Environment; and People United to Leave No One Behind); a National Strategy Committee that analyzes and discusses actions, proposals and recommendations made by the working groups; and a Follow-Up and Evaluation Committee. (Figure 1).
As these committees are organized in accordance with the participatory and multi-stakeholder emphasis of the 2030 Agenda, they include representatives of the agencies and institutions that make up the federal government, CSOs, the academic and scientific communities, the private sector and cross- sectoral national systems.
2 In March 2018, the committee of international experts that follows up on the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) recommended that \0xECthe state party take fully into account its obligations under the Covenant and ensure the full enjoyment of the rights enshrined therein in its implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the national level, with international assistance and cooperation when needed, by incorporating them into the work of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 
Development.

FIGURE 1.  
Structure of the committees that make up the National Council for the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development

The Follow-Up and Evaluation Committee, professionals, representatives of higher edas the body responsible for monitoring the ucation institutions from every region of development and progress of policies relat- the country and members of CSOs, INEGI ed to each SDG, will be made up of research and the National Council for the Evaluation 

of Social Development Policy (CONEVAL). It is expected that the committeeis evaluations, studies and diagnostics will have a focus on gender and cultural diversity, to ensure that the principle of \0xECleaving no one behind be both intersectional and sustainable over the long term.
The First Ordinary Session of the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was held on May 31, 2018, bringing together representatives of the public, academic, private and civil sectors. The accomplishments of this meeting include the approval of its operating guidelines, mechanisms for multi-stakeholder participation, the yearly program of activities and the initial draft of the National Strategy. There were also discussions of the need to incorporate a focus on sustainable development into planning and bud-
Creation of the Council for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda  of the state of Hidalgo.
getary processes, particularly the 20192024 National Development Plan, as well as the 2019 federal budget. 
The following steps were also approved:
1. Creating OSIs in all remaining states;
2. Promoting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the municipal level;
3. Establishing working groups for the 2030 Agenda;
4. Submitting the initial draft of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda to public review via the platform www.gob.
mx/participa.
 
As a result of the open dialogue held at this session, it was also agreed to \0xECanalyze modifications to the decree creating the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development to ensure the representation of civil society organizations, the private sector and academia with a voice and vote. This proposal was made by the CSO present.
Creation of Subnational 2030 Agenda 
Implementation and Follow-Up Agencies
At the subnational level, the 2030 Agenda has been implemented through two key spaces for promoting local development: CONAGO and the National Institute for Federalism and Municipal Development (INAFED). 
In June 2017, CONAGO created the 2030 Agenda Executive Implementation Commission, which serves as an organizing space through which governors can contribute to implementing the SDGs, share experiences, coordinate actions and develop state-level monitoring and follow-up mechanisms. One of the commitments of this commission has been the creation of OSIs in each state, which involve municipal authorities, federal delegates, representatives of civil society, academics and entrepreneurs. As of June 2018, 31 of the countryis 32 states3 have created OSIs and 29 of these have been formally launched. Local OSIs are in charge of coordinating the design and execution of strategies, policies, 
Presentation of the 2017-2023 Development Plan of the State of Mexico (March 15, 2018). The State of Mexico has embraced the 2030 Agenda as the central axis of its planning.

3 Aguascalientes, Baja California, Baja California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila, Colima, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Mexico City, Mexico State, Michoac\0xB7n, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Le\0xDBn, Oaxaca, Puebla, Quer\0xC8taro, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potos\0xCC, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala, Veracruz and Zacatecas.
programs and actions for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the state level, as well as bringing together different local actors. Due to the differences in size and need between each state, there are major variations in terms of the number of members of each local OSI, as well as which sectors and government agencies are represented and made full voting members. Over 300 municipalities have also created mechanisms for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
3.2 INCORPORATION OF THE SDGs INTO NATIONAL AND SUBNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND BUDGETS
Reform of the Planning Law 
With the goal of guaranteeing the incorporation of the 2030 Agenda into national democratic planning, a reform of the planning law was published in the Official Gazette of the Federation on February 16, 2018. 
The bill proposed by the president and approved by congress includes the three dimensions of sustainable development and the principles of equity, inclusion and nondiscrimination as guides for orienting longterm national development projects. 
The modification of the Planning Law also introduced the concept of sustainability into national planning, established precise criteria for guaranteeing the human right to a healthy environment, and determined the participation of government agencies in the preparation of the National Development Plan (NDP). This reform also strengthened the long-term vision of the NDP, which must now contain:
1. Projections and considerations for 20 years out; 
2. A general overview of the current status of priority issues; 
3. Specific goals and strategies to reach them, taking their interrelations into account;
4. Performance indicators that allow for the evaluation of each objective and goal. 
 
These modifications recognize the relevance and continuity of the 2030 Agenda across presidential administrations through the definition of new criteria for the formulation and instrumentalization of the NDP, the programs that derive from it and the actions of the federal government.
Aligning the Federal Budget  with the SDGs
To increase the amount of information on the opportunities and importance of public investments on development issues, the OPR and the Finance and Public Credit Secretariat (SHCP) have analyzed the federal budget to identify which items contribute to the implementation of each SDG. (Figure 2 and 3) 
This analysis revealed that, in the 2018 federal budget, 80.7% of Budgetary Programs 
FIGURE 2.  
Number of BPs connected to each SDG
FIGURE 3.  
SDGs connected to Budgetary Programs

(BPs) are connected to the 2030 Agenda, while 156 of the 169 SDG indicators are connected to at least one BP.4
After this stage of relating the budget with the SDGs, the effectiveness or impact of public spending on compliance with the 2030 Agenda must be evaluated. This will allow us to reorient public spending to guarantee the implementation of the SDGs.
4 http://www.transparenciapresupuestaria.gob. mx/work/models/PTP/Presupuesto/Documentos_anteriores/mexico_ods.pdf
Analyzing Global Indicators 
The 2030 Agendais targets and indicators are the central pillar of the process of measuring and monitoring the implementation of the SDGs. In June 2016, INEGI initiated a national mapping process for the 2030 Agendais 232 global indicators to determine which indicators are applicable in Mexico, what their level of availability and dissagregation is, and which government agencies served as the sources for this information. As a result of this analysis, it was determined that 169 global indicators are applicable in Mexico, while the other 63 indicators either do not apply domestically or require additional regional or global calculations. Of the 169 indicators that apply domestically, 83 are measured periodically (although they present disaggregation challenges), 36 are not measured periodically and 50 are either not measured or do not yet have an established methodology for their measurement. Analyzing alternatives for these indicators represents a significant challenge for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. It will also be important to make progress in the analysis, proposal and collection of other domestic indicators that can contribute to monitoring high-impact policies.
Besides these measures, the 2030 Agenda has also provided a framework for structuring other development goals in different sectors and in cross-sectoral systems. One concrete example is the policy \0xEC25 by 25: National Objectives on the Rights of Children and Adolescents, which uses the SDGs to establish national goals for this demographic segment.
Subnational Strategic Planning for the 2030 Agenda 
Apart from the creation of the OSIs, several states have already made significant progress on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. Twelve states have aligned their State Development Plans (SDPs) with the SDGs. One of them, the state of Hidalgo, besides aligning its strategic programs with the Agenda, has developed a regulatory framework that includes long-term planning. Mexico City, in turn, has developed a publicly available digital platform for following-up on the General Development Plan for the Capital, which includes monitoring the SDGs and other associated goals. In 2017, the Inter-American Development Bank recognized the Mexico City governmentis efforts on this platform. Meanwhile, the government of the State of Mexico has requested the support of the United Nations System in designing a State Development Plan that incorporates the 2030 Agenda from its earliest stages.
To make this process easier for state governments, the OPR prepared a publication titled Guide for Incorporating a 2030 Agenda Focus in the Preparation of State and Municipal Development Plans.5
Since June 2017, the INAFED has been implementing an Inter-institutional Program for strengthening the capacities of local governments with the objective of consolidating inclusive, resilient and sustainable municipalities. This program includes a Technical Assistance Model for the implementation of the SDGs at the municipal level, with 17 goals that correspond to the jurisdiction of this level of government. Starting in June 2018, this model will include a Municipal Identification Card for each municipality evaluated.
The INAFED has also raised awareness of the 2030 Agenda among government officials, held organizational manual preparation workshops, aligned Municipal Development Plans with the SDGs and analyzed police and good government proclamations.
5 https://www.gob.mx/agenda2030/documentos/guia-para-incorporar-el-enfoque-de-la-agenda-2030-en-la-elaboracion-de-planes-estatalesy-municipales-de-desarrollo
National Strategy for the 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda
In 2017, the president began development on a National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the first draft of which is expected to be completed in 2018. Its primary objectives are: defining the principal lines of action that could orient the development strategies of present and future governments; identifying existing policies that have a potential impact on compliance with the SDGs; establishing concrete commitments for areas where Mexico still has pending issues; and ensuring continuity and visibility for existing federal policies.
The National Strategy is the result of collaborative efforts between different actors with focuses that are relevant in terms of thematic priorities, challenges and proposed solutions. Its actions include: the analysis of each SDG by federal institutions; the organization of five regional forums with representatives of civil society, the National Institute of Social Development (INDESOL), the Foreign Affairs Secretariat (SRE) and the Mexican Agency for International Development Cooperation (AMEXCID); dialogues with the private sector in conjunction with the SRE and AMEXCID; an online public review process through the gob.mx/participa platform; a Senate forum on a comprehensive approach to the 2030 Agenda; the development of five analyses prepared by the Ibero-American University; and the work on national goals and indicators done by INEGI in collaboration with other actors.
The ultimate goal of the National Strategy is to ensure continuity across administrations, independently of any political changes that may occur, as well as serving as a base for the National Development Plans for the 2018-2024 and 2024-2030 presidential administrations. The National Strategy is being developed with the participation of approximately 50 federal agencies and will be brought for consultation before all sectors of society. Its contents, including challenges and barriers to implementation, will be revised periodically, as will the contributions of all sectors and specific actions that have made an impact.
As part of the development of the National Strategy, 12 units of the federal government were designated as Coordinating Units for each of the 17 SDGs, in accordance with their thematic and sectoral characteristics (the SEMARNAT coordinates 5 SDGs, for example). Each one of these units has been in charge of coordinating the collection and incorporation of inputs into the National Strategy and communicating with the Shared Responsibility Units (UGC) that directly or indirectly affect compliance with each SDG. The SRE is a key agency here, as it serves as a UGC for all 17 SDGs.
One outstanding example of this is the Agrarian, Land and Urban Development Secretariat (SEDATU) nresponsible for SDG 11: \0xECMake cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainablen which has prepared a matrix for identifying and following up on those initiatives, projects and actions with which the Mexican government has contributed to the implementation of the New Urban Agenda approved at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in October 2016.

FIGURE 4.  
State coordinating units for each SDG


SEDESOL
SEP
SENER

SAGARPA
INMUJERES
SHCP 
SE / STPS

SALUD
SEMARNAT
SE





	SEDESOL  SHCP		SEDATU		SEMARNAT


SEMARNAT
SEGOB

SEMARNAT

SEMARNAT
AMEXCID




3.3 OWNERSHIP OF THE NEW DEVELOPMENT PARADIGM
Civil Society
CSOs have mobilized to develop channels for dialogue and constructive, effective participatory processes alongside the government, so that the 2030 Agenda can be implemented with a bottom-up focus.
Some of the primary demands of CSOs are for the OSIs to organically incorporate civil society; for the National Strategy to include short, medium and long-term goals, as well as to better include an explicit focus on the promotion and defense of human rights; and to develop and reinforce the SDG capacities of CSOs and public servants at the national, state and municipal levels.
The CSOs that are following up on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda issue very specific proposals and recommendations. The process of preparing the 2018 Voluntary National Review has allowed for many of these to be shared. 
In terms of measurement, monitoring and evaluation systems, this sector has emphasized the problems connected to national indicators and the disaggregation of data. To confront the challenges of redefining and updating indicators, the participation of CSOs in these processes is encouraged. Furthermore, there is a need to integrate precise measurements into the Agendais official monitoring, including a focus on human rights, as well as a consideration of inequality gaps associated with each goal. CSOs have also insisted on the need for Mexico to participate in the definition of regional indicators.
In terms of inclusion, CSOs mentioned the importance of continuous participation and feedback in the process of designing, implementing and following up on the 2030 Agenda, as well as guaranteeing the participation of a larger number of CSOs and citizens and strengthening the capacities of organizations that work with vulnerable populations. They have identified sensitive areas in the formalization of opportune and participatory mechanisms for implementing and following up on global and regional agendas that would allow for the promotion of bottom-up policies. Regarding the National Strategy, an immediate need has been identified for its final design to include proper mechanisms that allow for the effective participation of civil society. 
In terms of CSOsi participation in the National Council, they underscored the need to increase the proportion of representation of civil society in the different working groups; to have committees that are focused on the 2030 Agendais cross-sectoral issues; and to ensure that the participation criteria for these committees is based on the experience or impact of participating organizations.
Representatives of civil society have also recognized the mechanisms used by the Foreign Affairs Secretariat to jointly develop the countryis position at international follow-up forums as being good practices. Some organizations mentioned the need to use public resources to ensure that participation is nondiscriminatory. 
As illustrations of the possible cooperation between civil society and the government, the work done for the preparation of the 2016-2030 National Strategy and Action Plan on Mexican Biodiversity (Enbiomex) under the oversight of the Mexican Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity (CONABIO) and the work on the National Strategy for the Prevention of Teen Pregnancy (ENAPEA) show the importance of using effective participation mechanisms to bring together different sectors of society.
One lesson learned through the recent talks between the government and civil society has been the need to establish a new relationship between these actors that does not just focus on providing information, but instead truly encourages political dialogue and impact.6
CSOs have also insisted on the importance of promoting a critical, active and multi-actor adoption of the 2030 Agenda. One important challenge has been the execution of a nationwide awareness campaign directed at the entire population, with an em-
6 Mexico has created a legal framework that serves as a model for government-civil society relations. The Federal Law on Promoting the Activities of Civil Society Organizations (LFFAROSC) recognizes the contributions of civil society organizations to the public interest and the countryis development. Furthermore, this law brings together those federal agencies that act as liaisons with civil society to define the policies for promoting the activities of CSOs, preparing reports on these actions, providing federal grants to CSOs and operating the Federal CSO Registry.
phasis on public servants, CSOs and high school students.
The multi-stakeholder initiatives aimed at strengthening the adoption of the 2030 Agenda by the citizenry have included the 2016-17 training sessions carried out through the Social Co-Investment Project. These sessions were held in 10 states across the country during regional meetings organized by INDESOL that drew over 1,500 organizations. Another initiative was the 2016-17 Technologies for the Greater Good project, which involved training over 500 CSOs in eight states across Mexico on the 2030 Agenda and volunteerships for development, sharing technological tools offered by allies to build different capacities. In April 2018, the app Voluntariado Generaci\0xDBn 2030 was launched, which was designed and promoted under the framework of an alliance for sustainable development between different sectors, bringing CSOs and the government together with volunteers who are interested in contributing to reaching the SDGs. The SREis Department of Outreach to Civil Society Organizations (DGVOSC) has also organized conferences and seminars on the role of civil society in defining and adopting the 2030 Agenda. These activities culminated in the publication of the book titled Citizen Diplomacy and Sustainable Development in Mexico.7
In terms of youth participation and the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, one important policy has been the creation of the Hos-
7 Luz Elena Ba\0xD2os Rivas (ed.), Diplomacia Ciudadana y Desarrollo Sostenible en M\0xC8xico, Mexico City, Secretar\0xCCa de Relaciones Exteriores, 2017, available at: www.gob.mx/cms/uploads/ attachment/file/294560/Diplomacia_ciudadana_y_desarrollo_sostenible_en_M_xico.pdf
pital of Emotions; this project provides mental health services to young people between the ages of 12 and 29. The initiative was born out of the results of the organization My World 2030: The United Nations Survey for a Better World, as well as a study of other youth trends. My World Mexico has also mobilized individuals and organizations for the implementation, monitoring, and dissemination of the 2030 Agenda in 27 states.
As part of the youth adoption of the 2030 Agenda at the subnational level, the Mexican Youth Institute (IMJUVE), in collaboration with several universities and state governments, created the Youth for SDGs project. Between 2017 and June 2018, this project has promoted awareness of the SDGs and volunteerships for development involving over 1,000 young people in nine states across Mexico. The state government of Morelos is also implementing a project known as Generation 2030, which is training 30 young volunteer leaders on SDG issues, comprehensive approaches, volunteership and methods of influencing policy. Through these leaders, around 900 young people have been mobilized across the state, sharing their knowledge with their peers. Finally, the state government of Puebla, in collaboration with other sectors, organized the Re-Design Puebla Social Innovation Hackathon, a technology fair that promoted initiatives from young people aimed at implementing the 2030 Agenda at the subnational level.
To encourage the participation of young people in the future, IMJUVE has prepared a 

proposal to incorporate the youth perspective on the 2030 Agenda in a comprehensive manner. There is currently a nationwide communication plan to inform young people of the actions that the government and other interested actors are undertaking with regards to SDG implementation.
Private Sector
The Mexican government has established different channels of communication with the private sector, including the Alliance for Sustainability (AxS) launched by AMEXCID, as well as a permanent dialogue with the Business Coordinating Council (CCE) and its members. The over 50 members of the AxS nwhich include companies, foundations and business associationsn have created five working groups on strategic areas of the 2030 Agenda: Affortable and Clean Energy; Sustainable Cities and Communities; Responsible Production and Consumption; Education; and Social Inclusion. Each working group established an action plan for 2017 and 2018 that identified the shared needs of their business models and the SDGs with the goal of promoting international cooperation projects that confront these challenges. The AxS and the CCE have also contributed to the National Strategy with proposals for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Academic and Scientific Community
The implementation of the 2030 Agenda requires a strong academic, technical and scientific component to ensure that decision makers promote consistent, viable and evidence-based policies.
In Mexico, communication with the academic and scientific community regarding the implementation of the 2030 Agenda has occurred through various channels. A group of researchers coordinated by the Ibero-American University, for example, has prepared policy proposals for each of the five pillars of the 2030 Agenda (people, planet, prosperity, peace and partnerships). These documents will be submitted for discussion and consideration to the National Councilis working groups. These five documents present an overview of the status of each pillar in Mexico and describe policies from around the world that have worked to confront obstacles in each area, as well as identifying 24 axes of solutions and 85 specific policies that can be applied to confront these challenges.
In 2018, the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN) will be launched in Mexico, which will have three lines of action: 1) Strengthening dialogue and serving as a bridge between academia and the public sector; 2) Generating technological solutions that support sustainable development; and 3) Promoting education on sustainability issues and awareness of the 2030 Agenda. To ensure the impact of this network, it will also participate in the National Council. As the network will have a national scope, the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) will be in charge of coordinating the work of the SDSN Mexico.
Parallel to this development, important progress has been made in terms of academiais contributions to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda in Mexico. The National Public Policy Lab (LNPP) of the 
Center for Research and Teaching in Economics (CIDE), with the support of CitiBanamex and in collaboration with the Mario Molina Center and the state government of Guanajuato, has completed a subnational mapping of SDG indicators that covers 59 metropolitan areas and Mexicois 32 states. This will allow comparisons to be made and experiences to be shared in the process of confronting shared challenges (see Appendix 2).
Furthermore, INFONAVITis Center for Sustainable Development Research worked on the Housing and SDGs in Mexico Project. This initiative describes the role of housing as the unifying element of development and urban prosperity under the framework of the New Urban Agenda approved at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III), held in Quito, Ecuador in 2016.
International Cooperation Agencies and Funds
Many bilateral and multilateral international cooperation agencies have collaborated on the implementation of the SDGs in Mexico. In accordance with current international cooperation programs and laws, the 2030 Agenda has provided international cooperation agencies with a framework for structuring their financial, technical and analytic support and aligning it with the governmentis development objectives and strategies. This support is not only directed to federal institutions and local governments, but also universities, the private sector and representatives of civil society.
International cooperation has focused on issues including but not limited to the adoption and institutionalization of the 2030 Agenda and its application to different policy cycles.
International cooperation agencies have also worked with the government to create tools to measure progress on the implementation of the SDGs. The City Prosperity Initiative (CPI) used by INFONAVIT to measure urban prosperity, for example, was developed with international support. These agencies, in conjunction with a variety of CSOs, have also contributed to the definition of national indicators for SDG 16 through a study of the Mexican context that identified problems related to this goal.
Regarding the institutionalization of the 2030 Agenda, several agencies have worked with the authorities to operationalize and strengthen national systems, spaces and mechanisms, such as the National Council for the 2030 Agenda. Different international cooperation agencies have also organized regional dialogues and training sessions to raise awareness of the 2030 Agenda among CSOs and young people.
Political Parties
In a democratic country like Mexico, which has a highly competitive electoral environment, the continuity of the 2030 Agenda requires different political forces to commit to its principles and objectives.
Fortunately, in the current electoral cycle, Mexicois main political parties and coalitions have come out in favor of the 2030 Agenda in their position papers and electoral platforms. For example, in the document titled Notes for an Administrative Program, the coalition of the National Action Party, the Party of the Democratic Revolution and the Citizensi Movement mentions the 2030 Agenda and the importance of reducing inequality within and among countries.8
The Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), in turn, has incorporated the 2030 Agenda and the focus on sustainable development into the new version of its Statement of Principles,9 Action Program,10 Bylaws11 and Vision of the Future.12
The coalition of the Labor Party (PT), the National Renewal Movement (MORENA) 
and the Social Encounter Party (PES) has also referenced the 2030 Agenda in the document National Project 2018-2024.13
3.4 TO LEAVE NO ONE BEHIND
\0xECLeaving no one behind represents a major challenge. While the population as a whole enjoys a better standard of living than in
8 http://repositoriodocumental.ine.mx/xmlui/bitstream/handle/123456789/94343/CG2ex 
201712-22-rp-5.1-a3.pdf 
9 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/
DeclaraciondePrincipios2017.pdf
10 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/ProgramadeAccion2017.pdf
11 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/Estatutos2017.pdf
12 http://pri.org.mx/SomosPRI/Documentos/VisiondeFuturo2017.pdf
13 \0xECProyecto de Naci\0xDBn 2018-2024, 2017, available at: https://drive.google.com/file/d/11B0aN 
BuVpHB7GDVXhCKdYvVKw7D7Ta-x/view
previous years, it is important to ensure that all groups can exercise their rights, including rural populations, indigenous peoples, Afro-Mexicans, senior citizens, children and adolescents, people with disabilities, the LGBTI community, migrants and refugees. For example, only 46.5% of young people with disabilities go to school (INEGI, 2014), there is a salary gap of 5.1% between women and men (ENOE, 2017), 58.2% of the rural population is below the poverty line and, of a total indigenous population of 12 million, 71.9% are poor or extremely poor (CONEVAL, 2016).
To address these challenges and protect the human rights of vulnerable populations, Mexico has promoted institutional measures that range from constitutional reforms to specific projects, such as the Mexican Norm NMX-R-025-SCFI-2015 on Labor Equality and Non-Discrimination. These actions reaffirm the countryis desire and political commitment to dismantle the structures that produce and reproduce dynamics of exclusion, segregation, discrimination and underrepresentation, as with other forms of social, economic and environmental injustice.



IV. REVIEW OF GOALS  (HLPF THEMATIC REVIEW)

In Mexico, we have an analysis for each SDG that utilizes a set of priority national goals and their associated indicators. This information is contained in the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda, which has the objective of consulting different sectors and orienting future actions by starting from a solid base of shared information. In the following pages of the VNR, there is relevant information for each SDG, divided into advances, emblematic actions and challenges. The information contained in these sections derives from the analyses of each SDG that were conducted by federal agencies during the design of the National Strategy. Each SDG also includes boxes with complementary positions provided independently by other actors from civil society and the United Nations System.
This section is organized into four parts. The first three belong to the thematic focuses of the 2018 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development (Transformation towards sustainable and resilient societies: 
SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12, 15), the 2019 High-Level Political Forum (Empowering people and ensuring inclusiveness and equality: SDGs 4, 8, 10, 13, 16) and the 2017 High-Level Political Forum (Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world: SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14). The last section is dedicated to partnerships and means for implementing the Agenda (SDG 17).
4.1 TRANSFORMATION TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AND RESILIENT SOCIETIES: SDGs 6, 7, 11, 12, 15
SDG 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all.
Mexico faces major challenges in terms of efficient and sustainable water use, in the preservation of ecosystems that are essential to the water cycle and in the supply of quality services to the entire population.

ADVANCES
\0xEF Running water coverage at the national level was 94.5% in 2015 (CONAGUA, 2017) and 95.3% of the population has continuous access to a source of water (INEGI, 2015).
\0xEF 96.97% of the water supply is disinfected (CONAGUA, 2017).
\0xEF 93.6% of the population living in private dwellings has drainage (INEGI, 2016).
\0xEF 87.2% of indigenous households in Mexico have potable running water and 73.1% have drainage (CDI, 2015). 
\0xEF Current hydraulic infrastructure allows for the treatment of 63% of municipal wastewater (CONAGUA, 2018).
\0xEF 32.8% of wastewater from the industrial sector is treated (CONAGUA, 2017).
\0xEF Mexico is the country with second highest number of wetlands at 6,331; 142 of these are listed on the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (CONAGUA, 2017).
\0xEF The volume of Official Development Assistance that Mexico receives from the OECD for water and sanitation is 120.8 million dollars (OECD, 2016).

 EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The National Rainwater Collection and Green Technology in Rural Areas Program (PROCAPTAR), operated by the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), contributes to expanding coverage of water and sanitation services.
\0xEF The National Water Reserves Program covers 295 watersheds through 13 decrees, in excess of the goals for this administration.
\0xEF CONAGUAis National Water Quality Monitoring Network operates at 5,000 sites.
\0xEF The National Water Reserves Program seeks to ensure water levels or minimum volumes in order to protect the environment and conserve ecosystems associated with surface water. Surface water reserves have also been established for sustainable use or conservation.
\0xEF The Payment for Ecosystem Services 
Program, operated by the National Forest Commission (CONAFOR), supports conservation practices and prevents rezoning; the National Wetland Inventory surveys, classifies and evaluates wetlands for their protection, restoration and use.
\0xEF The CONAGUA-led Comprehensive Water and Sanitation Agency Development Plan (PRODI) makes investments that allow these agencies to be more efficient and sustainable.
\0xEF The Indigenous Infrastructure Program (PROII-CDI) has undertaken actions to fight the underdevelopment of indigenous communities in terms of basic infrastructure (potable water, drainage and sanitation).
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Achieving a rate of zero overexploitation of aquifers and watersheds and ecological degradation of rivers, taking the impact of climate change into account.
\0xEF Providing the human, material and budgetary resources needed to ensure the sustainability of the water supply, particularly for human consumption.
\0xEF Guaranteeing the conservation of ecosystems that depend on water.
\0xEF Reducing industrial pollution, particularly from the mining and hydrocarbon industries, as well as the over-concession of the nationis water.
\0xEF Improving the regulation of potable water and sanitation services at the municipal level.
\0xEF Improving hydraulic infrastructure to meet the countryis growing needs, particularly in terms of wastewater treatment and the quality of drainage services in rural communities.
\0xEF Providing access to potable water, sanitation and hygiene services to indigenous, Afro-Mexican, suburban and rural communities.
\0xEF Increasing the reuse of water in industry and municipal services and the practice of aquifer recharging. 
BOX 1:  
Complementary Positions for SDG 6 Expressed in the Review Process14
\0xEF The potable water coverage that is currently measured does not include the three variables needed to meet the requirements of Indicator 6.1 for SDG 6: that water must be free of pollutants, that it must be accessible within dwellings or businesses and that it must be available when needed. Taking this into account, potable water access is estimated to be only slightly over 40% (WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program).
\0xEF All hydraulic infrastructure for the treatment of municipal wastewater should be operational, and all wastewater should be collected.
\0xEF Although it has been reported that 98% of the water supply is disinfected, it should be guaranteed that it is free from pollutants. In rural communities, 20% of water contains fluorides, nitrates or arsenic and 40% contains some sort of contamination.
\0xEF Access to sewage or wastewater collection systems does not guarantee that this wastewater is treated, as it could be then released into the public water supply, a septic tank, drainage ditches or rivers, lakes or seas (PAS Indicator, National Catalog of Indicators, CONAGUA, 2016).
\0xEF Exploration and exploitation of unconventional hydrocarbons should be 
14 This box includes information suggested by the United Nations System and a variety of CSOs that deepens the discussion on this issue. Contributors are responsible for this information.
conducted in a way that avoids the consumption and contamination of millions of liters of water.
\0xEF Laws and regulations on environmental responsibility should effectively dissuade potential infringers from committing environmental crimes instead of simply establishing mechanisms allowing them to pay to pollute.
\0xEF It is important to strengthen the criteria for aligning the budget with the SDGs so that the BPs effectively respond to precise criteria, as is the case for SDG 6.
\0xEF It is important to have information on hygiene criteria, including access to water and soap for washing hands.
\0xEF It is important to pass a General Water Law to guarantee the human right to water and sanitation, as has been recognized in Article 4 of the Mexican Constitution since February 2012.
\0xEF The exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons should not jeopardize the availability of water needed to guarantee the human right to water.
\0xEF The transparency of information on the use and volume of underground water concessions should be strengthened.
\0xEF 13.4% of children and adolescents lack access to water and sanitation in their homes and schools (CONEVAL, 2015).
\0xEF Mexico needs to secure its federal spending on water and sanitation (see 2016, 2017 and 2018 Federal Budgets). Between 2016 and 2017, this 

spending reduction was over 37%.
48



SDG 7: EnSurE accESS to afforDablE, rEliablE, SuStainablE anD moDErn  EnErGy for all. 
Mexico is a country with a high degree of electricity coverage, but challenges remain in isolated rural areas. Electricity is primarily generated through fossil fuels, although the percentage of clean energy has increased and it is expected that the budget for this sector will double over the next five years.
ADVANCES
\0xEF 98.6% of the population has access to electricity (CFE, 2016).
\0xEF 95.6% of indigenous households have electricity (CDI, 2015).
\0xEF 20% of the countryis electricity comes from a clean source (SENER, 2016).
\0xEF Energy intensity fell by 5% between 2012 and 2016, which means that less energy is needed to produce each peso of the GDP (SENER, 2017).
From 2013 to 2015, 1.084 billion pesos were invested in research and development on sustainable energy (SENER, 2018).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF In terms of clean energy, the Electrical Industry Law, the Geothermal Law, the Energy Transition Law and the Biofuel Promotion and Development Law promote and regulate the sustainable development of the electric industry. 
\0xEF Clean Energy Certificates accredit the production of a quantity of electricity produced from sustainable sources.
\0xEF The Energy Management System establishes methods and processes for improving energy efficiency.
\0xEF The National Atlas of Areas with High Energy and Renewable Energy Potential promotes the use of renewable energy resources.
\0xEF The launch of the Natural Gas Market has contributed to the creation of an energy market based on the reliable and accessible supply of hydrocarbons.
\0xEF In 2018, Mexico was admitted to the International Energy Agency (the first and, to date, only member from Latin America and the Caribbean).
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Providing basic energy services to all populations. 
\0xEF Having a 100% reliable census of the population that lacks electricity.
Reducing dependence on fossil fuels, which currently represent 79.7% of the electricity generated domestically.
\0xEF Ensuring that the Energy Transition Law is tied to the federal budget and modifying current legislation that prevents energy companies from working on energy efficiency for federal institutions. 
\0xEF Expanding the executive abilities of the National Commission for Energy Efficiency and promoting investments in energy efficiency through changes to power rates.
\0xEF Setting a fixed budget for investments in energy efficiency.

SDG 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable.
In Mexico, over three quarters of the population lives in urban areas, the majority of which face many obstacles to implementing inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable urban development plans.
ADVANCES
\0xEF 98% of municipalities have an urban development plan, but 84% of them have not been implemented or updated or are otherwise deficient (SEDATU). 
\0xEF In 2015, 62.9% of Mexicois population lived in cities with over 15,000 inhabitants and 77% in cities with more than 2,500 inhabitants (INEGI, 2016).
\0xEF 56% of residences are located in urban areas (SEDATU/CONAVI, 2012).
\0xEF 50% of dwellings already meet the necessary quality standards (SEDATU/CONAVI).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The incorporation of the Right to the City into zoning and urban development legislation.
\0xEF The launch of the Sustainable Cities Network, whose goal is to reinforce actions at the institutional and community levels that are aimed at environmental protection and social development.
Updates to urban development plans now include a focus on urban sustainability.
\0xEF The Regional Development Plans for Northern, Central and South-Southeastern Mexico have the goal of reinvigorating regional development.
\0xEF The General Human Settlement, Zoning and Urban Development Law has set the groundwork for a national zoning strategy.
\0xEF The Sustainable Cities Network is a strategy for handling solid waste, restoring public spaces and building housing that makes use of green technology.
\0xEF INFONAVITis Green Mortgage Program grants credits for dwellings that utilize green technology to save water, electricity and gas.
\0xEF The Areas Voluntarily Destined for Conservation Initiative of the National Commission on Natural Protected Areas (CONANP) reinforces the shared responsibility of civil society and the private sector in protecting natural areas.
\0xEF The Natural Disaster Risk Reduction Program and the Urban Resilience Guide, designed by SEDATU, contribute to safe and resilient development in vulnerable regions of southeastern Mexico through capacity building. 
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Providing the financing needed for the development of urban infrastructure at the local level in a context of unplanned urban growth, environmental degradation and vulnerability 

to natural disasters.
52

\0xEF Reducing the vulnerability of communities to violence and crime in certain areas.
\0xEF Overcoming obstacles to the regularization of land rights in rural areas.
\0xEF Improving the quality of public transportation in Mexican cities to reduce its economic, environmental and social costs, which primarily affect vulnerable populations. There are efficiency, quality and safety challenges to achieving this.



SDG 12: Ensure sustainable consumption and production patterns.
Mexico has made important advances in the design of policies to promote sustainable consumption and production, but progress in terms of transforming these systems has been very limited and major changes are needed.
ADVANCES
\0xEF 24% of Mexicois 66 million hectares of forests and jungles are managed under the sustainable forest management paradigm (CONAFOR, 2017).
\0xEF Mexico is the country with the fifth highest use of cardboard and paper secondary fibers.
\0xEF In 2017, 0.77% of the federal budget for administrative materials and official documents and articles was spent on sustainable purchases.
\0xEF It is estimated that 34.5% of the countryis total food production is wasted (over 20 million pounds of foodstuffs). This wasted food would be enough to feed 7.4 million Mexicans (World Bank, 2017).
\0xEF Approximately 9.6% of the 42.9 million tons of solid waste generated in Mexicois cities is recycled each year (SEMARNAT, 2010).
\0xEF 70% of urban solid waste ends up in landfills (INEGI, 2016).
\0xEF Investments in nature tourism, ecotourism and adventure tourism added up to 146 billion pesos (SHCP, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The National Sustainable Production and Consumption Policy promotes sustainable production and consumption patterns for goods and services through a variety of policy tools.
\0xEF Mexico, through SEMARNAT, forms part of a working group addressing food waste. This initiative was created under the framework of the North American Commission for Environmental Cooperation and is supported by the World Bank and Worldwide Responsible Accredited Production (WRAP). 
\0xEF Mexico has legislation on the comprehensive management of solid waste, solid waste management plans and decentralized Comprehensive Urban Solid Waste Management Agencies. 
\0xEF The National Chemical Substances Profile shows the countryis infrastructure for the management of waste and other substances.
\0xEF The National Management Plan for Vehicles at the End of their Useful Life and the analog television collection program contribute to the proper management of dangerous substances.
\0xEF Legislative reforms on public purchases have been made that include sustainability criteria, such as (1) modifications to Article 14 of the Law on Public Sector Acquisitions, Leases and Services and Article 34 of the General Law on Equality Between Women and Men, which incorporates gender equality provisions; and (2) the Energy Transition Law, which regulates sustainable electricity use.
\0xEF Mexico has a legal framework that ensures the sustainable use of energy and water resources and environmental safeguards in acquisitions, leases and other services contracted by the federal government.
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Ensuring compatibility in the national legal framework for public purchases between the clauses on sustainability and other criteria.
\0xEF Eliminating, reforming or transforming incentives for the use of fuels that result in the deterioration of natural resources and biodiversity.
\0xEF Improving infrastructure for the transportation, storage and commercialization of food to reduce waste in the post-harvest period.
\0xEF Improving food management at strategic points of the production chain, with some food being rediverted to food banks.
\0xEF Strengthening environmental legislation on chemical substances and establishing regulatory guidelines for the prevention and mitigation of the environmental side effects of insecticides, fertilizers and other toxic substances. 
\0xEF Promoting the adoption of sustainability certificates in the tourism sector.

SDG 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss. 
Mexico is a megadiverse country in which almost 17% of its land surface is protected through a variety of conservation methods. It also has programs to fight desertification, reduce deforestation and conserve species.
ADVANCES
\0xEF The Natural Protected Areas (ANP) System protects 10.8% of the countryis land surface (CONANP, 2017). In total, 16.29% of the countryis land surface is protected through systems of protected areas and other conservation methods (SEMARNAT, 2018).
\0xEF 23.6 million hectares are managed using sustainable forestry practices 
(CONAFOR, 2017) and 337,735 
hectares of commercially logged forests are managed under the sustainability criteria established between 2000 and 2017 (CONAFOR, 2017).
\0xEF 2.6 million hectares of forest ecosystems are covered by the Payment for Ecosystem Services Program (CONAFOR, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF Mexico has National Strategies on the Reduction of Emissions due to Deforestation and Forest Degrada-
tion, on Mexican Biodiversity, on Sustainable Forest Management and on Sustainable Land Management.
\0xEF The ANP system provides protection for the countryis terrestrial surface.
\0xEF The Payment for Ecosystem Services Program has been addressing the problem of deforestation since 2003.
\0xEF The Action Program to Fight Desertification in Mexico seeks to slow and stop the advance of desertification, promote productivity in arid regions and improve the quality of life of their residents. There is also a Sustainable 
Land Management Program that seeks to improve terrestrial ecosystems.
\0xEF SAGARPAis Agriculture Promotion Program prevents changes to land use patterns in forest areas.
\0xEF CONANPis Species Conservation Action Program (PACE) focuses conservation efforts for 45 endangered species.
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Providing proper financial resources and legislation for the protection and management of ecosystems and biodiversity.
\0xEF Passing domestic legislation to properly implement the Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from their Utilization (ABS) to the Convention on Biological Diversity
\0xEF Ensuring policy consistency at the federal, state and municipal levels and transparency regarding practices of productive and extractive industries.
\0xEF Slowing the change of land use patterns due to agriculture and ranching.
\0xEF Reducing the overexploitation of lumber and non-lumber forest products, as well as illegal trafficking of forest resources.
\0xEF Developing capacities and methodologies to measure the economic value of natural goods and services.
\0xEF Creating opportunities to attract financing for Mexicois national and international commitments under this SDG, as well as promoting projects that make sustainable use of the countryis biodiversity.
4.2 EMPOWERING PEOPLE AND ENSURING INCLUSIVENESS AND EQUALITY: SDGs 4, 8, 10, 13, 16
SDG 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. 
In Mexico, ensuring access to child development services, improving the physical infrastructure of educational facilities, guaranteeing quality education (particularly for vulnerable populations) and harmonizing the education system with the demands of the labor market, among other measures, are essential elements for meeting this goal.
ADVANCES
\0xEF In the 2015-16 school year, the percentage of students who began elementary school with at least one year of preschool was 91.9% (SEP).
\0xEF In the 2015-16 school year, the gross attendance ratio (on-site and distance learning) was 78.7% (SEP). 
\0xEF 78.2% of the school age population (from 3 to 23 years of age) is enrolled in the National Education System (2015-16 school year, SEP).
\0xEF 70.5% of ninth grade students were placed at the elemental knowledge level or higher of the Language and Communication section of the standardized test applied under the National Plan for the Evaluation of Learning (PLANEA/SEP, 2015).
\0xEF 46.5% of disabled children, adolescents and young adults (3 to 29 years of age) go to school (SEP, CONADIS).
\0xEF 31.4% of young people and adults have knowledge of information and communications technology (INEGI, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The New Educational Model, launched in 2017, is structured around five axes: curricular planning, schools at the centre of the educational model, teacher training, inclusion and equity and governance of the education system.
\0xEF The Schools at ONE HUNDRED PERCENT Program, operated by the National Educational Infrastructure Institute (INIFED), has improved the physical infrastructure of more than 33,000 educational facilities across the country.
\0xEF The SEPis Full Time Schools Program has the objective of getting the most out of the time available for academic, athletic and cultural development, as well as freeing time for parents that had been used for raising their children so it can be dedicated to other activities, particularly remunerated work.
\0xEF The SEPis Schools at the Center Strategy has the goal of improving the quality of education.
\0xEF The National Plan for the Evaluation of Learning (PLANEA) has the goal of measuring the extent to which students have mastered a set of essential skills in the fields of language, communication and mathematics.
\0xEF The INEEis Professional Teaching Service is a mechanism that guarantees teachers to have the proper knowledge and skills for their job.
\0xEF The SEPis Digital Inclusion Program, part of the Learning 2.0 strategy (@ prende 2.0), seeks to develop digital skills and computational thinking of students and teaching staff. 
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Ensuring that efforts to improve the education system are not just concentrated on preschool education, but on early education as part of an inter-institutional policy that affirms the right of all children to quality education.
\0xEF Continuing and expanding physical improvements to educational infrastructure.
\0xEF Incorporating children and adolescents with special needs into the education system, as well as those belonging to indigenous or Afro-Mexican communities and those who live in isolated areas.
\0xEF Increasing the supply of quality education, particularly at the high school and college levels, and reducing the dropout rate.

BOX 5:  
Complementary Positions for SDG 4 Expressed in the Review Process18
\0xEF 14.9% of children and adolescents do not attend school; this percentage rises to 16.2% if we only look at adolescents, that is, nearly 2.2 million people between the ages of 12 and 17.
\0xEF 82.2% of children between 36 and 59 months of age developed properly in at least three of the following four categories: literacy-numerical ability, physical development, social and emotional development and domination of learning (ENIM, 2015).
\0xEF The dropout rate during the 201617 school year was 0.4% in elementary school, 3.9% in middle school and 11.8% in high school.
\0xEF One major challenge is the inclusion of a gendered approach in the strategy used to lower the high school dropout rate, as at this level, girls drop out at a higher rate than boys do.
\0xEF One out of every four children between the ages of 3 and 5 does not attend preschool. 
\0xEF Five out of every ten students have not learned the necessary lessons in language and communication to a satisfactory degree, which rises to six out of every ten for mathematics.
\0xEF The average level of education among the indigenous population is elementary school, which rises to middle school in the rest of the country.
\0xEF 76.6% of children and adolescents do not have access to internet.
\0xEF In 2015, one third of teachers did not have study plans and programs and one fourth of teachers did not have enough textbooks for their students (INEE).
\0xEF Two out of every three schools report that they have at least one student with special needs, while only 30% have staff trained to meet their needs (INEE, 2016).
\0xEF Enrollment in preschool needs to be increased and a comprehensive early education policy needs to be developed that recognizes and strengthens models of community intervention.
\0xEF It is a challenge to ensure a supply of teachers with initial and continuing education that contributes to the development of the knowledge and skills needed to foster positive behavior and well-being in children and adolescents.
\0xEF The Health in Your School Program needs to be strengthened, as health and education are the two pillars for enjoying a full life.
\0xEF A life cycle approach needs to be incorporated into the design of educational programs, strategies and policies.
18 This box includes information suggested by the United Nations System and a variety of CSOs that deepens the discussion on this issue. Contributors are responsible for this information.

SDG 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all. 
In Mexico, productivity and access to financial services have increased and the unemployment rate has remained low. Despite this progress, Mexico faces many major challenges to ensuring full, productive and decent employment for all.
ADVANCES
\0xEF Between 2013 and 2017, the Mexican economy grew in real terms at an average annual rate of 2.4% (UPEHP, 2018).
\0xEF In 2017, the contribution of different economic sectors to the GDP was as follows: primary, 3.3%; secondary, 30.9%; and tertiary, 65.7% (INEGI, 2017). 
\0xEF 55.8% of the population does not have social security (CONEVAL, 2016).
\0xEF According to data from the National Occupation and Employment Study (INEGI), the unemployment rate in 2017 was 3.44% and the percentage of people working in the informal economy was 57%.
\0xEF The unemployment rate for young people was 6.1% (ENOE-INEGI, 2017).
\0xEF The Labor Force Participation Rate for women was 43% (ENOE-INEGI, 2017).
\0xEF The Labor Force Participation Rate for people with disabilities was 39.1% in 2014 (ENADID-INEGI, 2014). 
\0xEF 52.1 million people have access to financial services (ENIF, 2015)
\0xEF 22.5% of micro-enterprise owners stated that they were unable to expand due to a lack of credit (ENAPROCE, 2014).
\0xEF 16% of International Development Cooperation projects are aimed at supporting commerce (AMEXCID, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The National Productivity Committee (CNP) is a consultative body whose purpose is to identify policies and actions that will increase productivity, by working holistically, sectorally and regionally.
\0xEF The STPSis National Employment Service (SNE) provides free assistance to people looking for work through job leads and economic or in-kind support for job training or self-employment.
\0xEF Special Economic Zones (SEZs) have the goal of closing regional gaps by taking advantage of the natural and logistical advantages of a geographic area.
\0xEF The STPSis Workplace Human Trafficking Prevention and Detection Inspection Protocol establishes mechanisms allowing workplace inspectors to act to prevent, detect and eradicate human trafficking.
\0xEF IMJUVEis Youth Employment Strategy has the goal of coordinating, connecting and bringing together actors in the job market to provide better job opportunities for the countryis young people.
\0xEF The STPSis Workplace Health and Safety Self-Management Program encourages businesses to ensure safe and hygienic workplaces.
\0xEF Mexican Norm NMX-R-025-SCFI-2015 on Labor Equality and Non-Discrimination incorporates the principle of non-discrimination into job recruitment procedures. It also closes the pay gap, along with other measures aimed at preventing and addressing workplace violence.
\0xEF The Tourism Connection Strategy promotes economic growth through credit incentives such as Improve Your Hotel and Improve Your Restaurant.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Closing the pay gap and incorporating a gender perspective into social programs.
\0xEF Creating jobs and ensuring the longterm financial sustainability of social programs.
\0xEF Democratizing and expanding access to financial services.
\0xEF Raising the minimum wage.
\0xEF Consolidating a tax system that generates enough revenue to finance a comprehensive economic development policy.
\0xEF Incorporating women, including transgender women, into economic activities from which they have traditionally been excluded.
\0xEF Guaranteeing that people with disabilities enjoy equal opportunities on the job market.
\0xEF Promoting training, resources and financing for micro-entrepreneurs and other sectors of the economy in accordance with their needs.
SDG 10: Reduce inequality within and among countries. 
Mexico is among the 25% of countries with the highest levels of inequality in the world. It is therefore vital to reduce inequalities between both individuals and regions of the country so that no one is left behind. This means getting rid of discriminatory laws, regulations and practices and questioning and changing structures that contribute to the permanence and reproduction of inequalities.
ADVANCES
\0xEF The Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) accumulated between Q1/2013 and Q1/2018 was 181.793 billion dollars (SE).
\0xEF The national GINI coefficient is 0.498 (CONEVAL, 2016). 
\0xEF As of December 2017, the income needed for a minimum standard of living was 1,491.65 pesos per month (CONEVAL, 2017). 
\0xEF There is a pay gap between women and men of 5.1% (ENOE, 2017).
\0xEF Domestic financing of the private sector represents 34.89% of GDP (SHCP, 2018). 
\0xEF Mexico receives 7.8 billion dollars in Official Development Assistance and Other Official Flows (OECD, 2016).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The tax reform has promoted a system of progressive taxation.
\0xEF The Tax Incorporation Regime (RIF) seeks out workers in the informal economy and aims to formalize their jobs, giving them access to insurance, housing, pension and credit benefits.
\0xEF SEZs have been created to encourage sustainable regional economic growth that reduces poverty, increases access to basic services and expands opportunities for healthy, productive lives.
\0xEF SEDESOLis National Inclusion Strategy (ENI) has the goal of improving access to social services and reducing deficiencies.
\0xEF In 2017, the Technical Group for the Incorporation of a Gender Perspective into Aid and Protection Policies for Migrant Women was created as part of the Interior Secretariatis Council on Immigration Policy. 
\0xEF Comprehensive Border Traffic Assistance Centers have been opened in Huixtla, Catazaj\0xB7 and Trinitaria, Chiapas, as have mobile social programs in municipalities along the southern border.
\0xEF Regional Visitor and Border Worker cards have been issued to immigrants from Guatemala and Belize who wish to work in one of the states along the southern border.
\0xEF SEGOB and SREis We Are Mexicans Strategy establishes comprehensive support measures for a safe, dignified return for deported Mexicans.

CHALLENGES
\0xEF Reducing inequalities in social infrastructure and promoting the economic integration of the countryis most underdeveloped regions through an approach based on universal social rights.
\0xEF Strengthening the stability of the nationis financial system when faced with shocks arising from global markets.
\0xEF Ensuring financial stability of the social security and pension systems, as well as eradicating structural discrimination against senior citizens. 
\0xEF Creating formal mechanisms that take advantage of the capacity of young migrants to act as agents of social change and economic development.



SDG 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts.
Mexico is a country that is highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change. It has formalized its adherence to the Paris Agreement and is carrying out a series of mitigation and adaptation measures. To fully comply with its national and international commitments on climate change, it must consolidate a green and inclusive economy that depends less and less on fossil fuels and that reverses trends towards rising emissions.
ADVANCES
\0xEF Casualties during extreme weather events have fallen, although they have caused an annual average of 186 deaths between 2000 and 2014 (CENAPRED).
\0xEF Mexico emits 683 million tons of carbon dioxide (INECC, 2015), which correspond to the consumption of fossil fuels in the transportation of people and merchandise (26.2%), electricity generation (19%) and industrial processes (17.3%).
\0xEF There were 125,000 tons of black carbon emissions in 2016 (BUR, INECC, 2016).
\0xEF Of Mexicois 2,456 municipalities, 1,071 are not considered highly vulnerable to or at high risk of extreme weather events (PECC, 2014).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The National Greenhouse Gases and Compounds Emissions Inventory allows the country to analyze its emissions by emission source.
\0xEF The National Emissions Registry (RENE) compiles information on industrial emissions of greenhouse gases and compounds.
\0xEF A tax on fossil fuel imports and sales (carbon tax) contributes to reducing carbon emissions.
\0xEF Regulations for the launch of an emissions trading or carbon market system.
\0xEF The National Climate Change Vulnerability Atlas is a structured, systematic collection of maps that shows the countryis vulnerability to climate change.
\0xEF The National Risk Atlas identifies the areas that are at the highest risk of extreme weather events.
\0xEF Ecological zoning programs include criteria for mitigating or adapting to the effects of climate change.
\0xEF The 2014-18 Special Climate Change Program contributes to national planning in the face of the effects of climate change.
\0xEF Mexico is taking steps to restore and reforest coastal wetlands.
\0xEF Climate Change Adaptation Programs in Natural Protected Areas (ANPs) provide information that orients adaptation measures.
\0xEF The National Strategy for Reducing Emissions due to Deforestation and Degradation helps mitigate climate change.
\0xEF The General Climate Change Law was reformed in April 2018 to adapt it to the Paris Agreement.
\0xEF Mexicois targets for climate change mitigation are to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 22% and shortlived air pollutants by 51% by 2030.
\0xEF The National Council of Science and Technology (CONACYT) and the National Ecology and Climate Change Institute (INECC) have created the Mexican Climate Change Report, which compiles a large part of the information generated on climate change over the last two decades.
Challenges
\0xEF Updating and consolidating instruments and regulations to meet the countryis commitments in terms of mitigating and adapting to the effects of climate change.
\0xEF Universalizing the focus on environmental protection among all levels of government.
\0xEF Launching Mexicois Emissions Trading System.
\0xEF Financing the measures needed to create a low-carbon economy. A $120-billion-dollar investment is needed over a 15-year period.
\0xEF Reducing the countryis dependence on fossil fuels. Current emissions trends could make it difficult to meet our commitments under the Paris Agreement.
\0xEF Understanding, quantifying and reporting on the effects of climate change.
SDG 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels.
Mexico has an institutional architecture based around the defense of human rights, the eradication of violence, transparency and support for victims, among other issues. Nevertheless, the country faces many challenges arising from its institutional weakness and the presence of criminal organizations, which condition the implementation of this SDG.
ADVANCES
\0xEF In 2015, Mexico came in second place from among 25 countries evaluated under the Management for Development Results criteria. (IDB).
\0xEF In 2016, the homicide rate was 20 per 100,000 people (INEGI, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The National Human Rights Program, launched during this administration, is the central axis of the governmentis policy on consolidating a rights-based society.
\0xEF The General Law on the Rights of Children and Adolescents recognizes them as subjects with rights, as well as groups that are highly vulnerable.
\0xEF Mexicois Action Plan under the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children includes the creation of a 2019-2030 Agenda of Priorities aimed at ending abuse, exploitation, torture, trafficking and all forms of violence against children and adolescents.
\0xEF The new accusatory criminal justice system guarantees better protection of the rights of both victims and suspects.
\0xEF The Violence Against Women Alert (AVGM) is a mechanism promoted by the Interior Secretariat through the National Commission for Preventing and Eradicating Violence Against Women (CONAVIM) that is aimed at confronting violence against women with coordinated actions.
\0xEF The Centers for Womenis Justice (CJMs), operated by the CONAVIM, are spaces that provide legal advice and support services for women and their children.
\0xEF The National Victim Support System is in charge of defining and applying policies for supporting victims.
\0xEF The National Transparency System is in charge of coordinating efforts in terms of transparency, access to information and the protection of personal information.
\0xEF The National Anticorruption System is a body in charge of coordinating efforts between authorities at all levels of government to prevent, investigate and punish corruption.
\0xEF The National Single Window includes a participatory platform and allows citizens to access information, services and data.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Reducing the presence and operational capacity of criminal organizations.
\0xEF Achieving effective international coordination and collaboration in the prevention of money laundering, drug trafficking and gun running, particularly with the United States of America and other countries where Mexican criminal organizations operate.
\0xEF Consolidating the implementation of government policies on human rights.
\0xEF Coordinating actions among the primary actors working to eradicate gender violence.
\0xEF Creating societal trust in the Victim Support System.
\0xEF Establishing a unified criminal code.
\0xEF Consolidating the National Anticorruption System and making it effective.
\0xEF Consolidating and maintaining budget transparency measures.



4.3 ERADICATING POVERTY  
AND PROMOTING PROSPERITY  IN A CHANGING WORLD:  
SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14
SDG 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere.
In Mexico, implementing this goal is both a considerable challenge and a unique opportunity to dignify the lives of the 43.6% of the population living in poverty. 
ADVANCES
\0xEF In accordance with the national poverty and scarcity indicators measured by CONEVAL (2016), of the countryis total population:
\0xEF Over 2 million Mexicans have moved out of extreme poverty. In 2016, 9.4 million people were classified as extremely poor.
\0xEF 53.4 million people are living in poverty.
\0xEF The number of Mexicans with access to healthcare has risen by 6.2 million people.
\0xEF The number of Mexicans with social security has risen by 3.4 million people.
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF SEDESOLis National Inclusion Strategy (ENI) contributes to securing social rights and reducing shortcomings through the coordination of policies and social programs that improve the lives of Mexicans. The results show improved coverage for people facing extreme food poverty through the National Crusade Against Hunger and the expansion of the network of community kitchens, which currently number 5,786 (SEDESOL, 2018).
\0xEF INFONAVIT and SEDATUis Papelito Habla Program serves as a tool providing legal certainty over oneis prop-
erty through the regularization of land and real estate.
\0xEF In terms of inclusion in the labor force, SEDESOLis PROSPERA Program coordinates institutional efforts and social policies relating to production, income generation, economic well-being, financial and labor inclusion and nutritional and health education for people living in poverty.
\0xEF The National Commission for the Development of Indigenous Peoplesi (CDI) Program for Improving Indigenous Productivity is one example of the measures taken to increase the productivity and income of vulnerable groups.
\0xEF The SEis National Financing Program for Micro-entrepreneurs and Rural Women contributes to the creation of productive businesses and increasing the productivity of existing businesses.
\0xEF The Comprehensive Social Information System (SISI) improves articulation of institutional responses to social shortfalls.
\0xEF The Social Portfolio promotes policy dialogue between citizens and authorities, reports on access to rights and social programs and allows citizens to follow up on measures and programs and express their priorities and needs.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Having a mechanism in place to detect and provide immediate support for vulnerable groups.
\0xEF Creating quality jobs and sustained and inclusive economic growth on the basis of a strong internal market.
\0xEF Transforming the vision in which fighting poverty is solely the responsibility of one subset of government institutions, when the dimensions of the challenge demand coordination and holistic policies.
\0xEF Incorporating a life-cycle approach into the design of programs, strategies and policies aimed at fighting poverty.
SDG 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture.
In Mexico, the population facing food insecurity has been reduced in recent years, as has the percentage of children suffering from chronic malnutrition. Nevertheless, guaranteeing quality nutrition and sustainable agricultural production continue to be major challenges.
ADVANCES 
\0xEF The number of Mexicans who have proper access to food has risen by 2.8 million people (CONEVAL, 2016).
\0xEF Mexico is the worldis 12th biggest food producer.
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The National Crusade Against Hunger includes a network of 5,560 community kitchens, feeding over half a million people every day.
\0xEF Price distortions for consumers have been regulated through legal decrees and the complementary supply of agricultural and livestock products.
\0xEF Access to financing for farmers contributes to improving logistics and the food supply.
\0xEF Mexican agricultural products have been positioned in international markets.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Guaranteeing effective access to varied, quality food in sufficient quantities for all people.
\0xEF Guaranteeing the access of local products to value-added markets.
\0xEF Improving planning and investment in infrastructure and transportation to increase opportunities for transitioning towards more sustainable agricultural models.
\0xEF Promoting the environmental resilience of the agricultural sector through universal insurance coverage for small producers.
SDG 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages.
Ensuring a healthy life and promoting the well-being of the population is a basic condition for ending inequality and poverty and guaranteeing the comprehensive human development of all.
ADVANCES
\0xEF The number of people with access to healthcare has risen by 6.2 million people (CONEVAL, 2016).
\0xEF The Popular Insurance Program has 53.7 million people enrolled (SSA, 2017).
\0xEF 84.5% children and adolescents have healthcare coverage (SIPINNA, 2018). 
\0xEF 96.7% of children have all of their vaccinations (SSA, 2015).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The following prevention programs are in place: Health in Your School, Safe Consultation, PreventIMMS and 
PreventISSSTE and the National Strategy for the Prevention and Control of Obesity and Diabetes.
\0xEF The SSAis Universal Vaccination Program and National Health Weeks prevent the primary causes of infant mortality.
\0xEF The INMUJERES National Strategy for the Prevention of Teen Pregnancy (ENAPEA) consists of inter-institutional measures aimed at preventing teen pregnancy that are coordinated with national, state and municipal policies and plans.
\0xEF IMSS-PROSPERAis Early Childhood Development Strategy promotes holistic growth, nutritional monitoring, cognitive and socio-emotional development and the timely detection and response to developmental issues.
\0xEF The Mexican Social Security Instituteis mobile app allows members to schedule appointments with their doctor, saving them time and money.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Ensuring effective access to quality healthcare services, eliminating discriminatory barriers, closing service gaps between different social groups and regions and ensuring the generation and effective use of healthcare resources.
\0xEF Guaranteeing the existence of relevant, reliable and truthful information on sexual and reproductive health, as well as access to birth control methods.
\0xEF Having a properly implemented legal framework for the control of drugs.



SDG 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls.
Gender inequality is a persistent problem in Mexico, with onerous consequences in structural, social and economic terms.
ADVANCES 
\0xEF In 2017, women made up, on average, 42% of local legislatures (OPPMM, 2018).
\0xEF In 2016, 17.4% of the directors of government institutions were women (National Government Census).
\0xEF Thirteen states adopted the minimum measures needed to bring state equality policies up to national standards (Equality Platform, INMUJERES).
\0xEF Twenty-eight states no longer have exceptions in their legislation allow-
ing minors to get married (INMUJERES, 2018).
\0xEF Women spend three times as much time as men on domestic work and other unpaid labor (ENUT, 2014).
\0xEF 43% of women aged 15 or older have entered the workforce, compared to 78% for men (ENOE, 2017).
\0xEF There is a pay gap between men and women of 5.1% (ENOE, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The General Law on Equality Between Women and Men (LGIMH) guarantees and regulates equality of opportunities and equal treatment between women and men.
\0xEF The General Law on the Right of Women to a Violence-Free Life (LGAMVLV) prevents, punishes and eradicates violence against women.
\0xEF Financing programs such as Small 
Business Women na project of INMUJERES, SHCP, INADEM and NAFINn and the National Financing Program for Micro-entrepreneurs and Rural Women na project of the SEn give women preferential access to credit.
\0xEF Article 41 of the Mexican Constitution requires parity between women and men as candidates for local and federal legislatures. 
\0xEF The 2013-2018 National Development Plan includes a holistic gender perspective.
\0xEF Mexico is one of the few countries to have a methodology for earmarking budgetary resources for gender equality.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Strengthening systems for following up on resources earmarked for gender equality and the empowerment of women.
\0xEF Developing a methodology that standardizes the data collected on femicides.
\0xEF Achieving the recognition, remuneration and equal redistribution between women and men of household labor, as well as guaranteeing full labor rights and protections for women and men who perform this work.

SDG 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation. 
It is important for Mexico to increase the competitiveness of its businesses, consolidate a modern and resilient transportation network and guarantee the presence of quality communication infrastructure across the nation while maintaining sustainable economic development that incorporates the use of exponential technology to accelerate the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
ADVANCES
\0xEF 11% of Mexicois businesses are in the manufacturing sector, creating 25% of the countryis jobs and representing 37% of its income (INEGI, 2016).
\0xEF 2.8% of small and medium manufacturing enterprises are part of global production chains, compared to 8.4% for large enterprises (SE).
\0xEF The primary destination of direct foreign investment is the manufacturing sector, with dynamism in the automotive sector and the aerospace industry.
\0xEF The federal highway network connects 66% of the population, 73% of the economically active population and 94% of gross total production (SCT).
\0xEF Mexico came in 51st place in the Global Competitiveness Index 2017-2018.
\0xEF Total spending on research and development represented 0.50% of the GDP in 2016, triple the amount at the start of the current administration (CONACYT).
\0xEF 36.4% of the business community finances research and development spending (CONACYT, 2012).
\0xEF 4.2% of businesses develop technological innovations (CONACYT, 2014).
\0xEF There are 365 researchers per million people (CONACYT, 2016).
\0xEF 63.9% of the population uses the internet, 45.3% uses computers and 72.2% uses mobile phones (INEGI).
\0xEF In 2016, Mexico received 910 million dollars through International Development Cooperation for infrastructure development (AMEXCID). 
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS 
\0xEF The National Infrastructure Program requires projects to be built in accordance with environmental, inclusiveness and efficiency criteria.
\0xEF The Law for Promoting Sustained Productivity Increases and Economic Competitiveness promotes economic growth, investment, productive infrastructure and technological content, as well as added value products.
\0xEF The INADEMis National Entrepreneur Fund supports projects for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.
\0xEF The Mexico Connected Program offers free internet connections. The Shared Network will offer 4G telecommunications services with coverage that will reach at least 92% of the population by 2024. The Mexico Connected Points Project provides training and digital education. All three are operated by the SCT.
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Having a regulatory framework that properly encourages the growth of domestic businesses.
\0xEF Regulating the microfinance sector to increase the productivity of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.
\0xEF Improving airport, aeronautic, highway, port, railway and highway capacity.
\0xEF Promoting capacity for technology adoption by businesses, as well as a culture of innovation and a long-term vision.
\0xEF Analyzing the impact of new technologies such as artificial intelligence, in compliance with the 2030 Agenda, as technological backwardness can increase inequality, affect vulnerable populations and create ethical dilemmas that threaten sustainable development.
SDG 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development.
Oceans, seas and coasts form an essential part of the countryis sustainable development. The resources they provide not only create jobs, but they also contribute to regulating global temperatures and absorbing carbon dioxide. The pollution and degradation of marine ecosystems has negative effects in terms of quality of life and the countryis social and economic development. 
ADVANCES 
\0xEF There are 37 Natural Protected Areas (ANPs) on Mexicois coasts, representing 22.05% of the seas under Mexican jurisdiction (SEMARNAT, 2017).
\0xEF In 2016, 0.4% of the total research budget was destined for marine technology (CONACYT).
\0xEF Port and maritime transport activities have steadily risen at an annual rate of 6.8% over the last ten years.
\0xEF Around 65% of fisheries are at maximum output, while 10% have growth potential, 15% are in decline and 10% are recovering (SEMARNAT).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The creation of new ANPs: 14.7 million hectares in the Revillagigedo National Park, 1 million hectares in the Pacific Islands Biosphere Reserve, 5.7 million hectares in the Mexican Caribbean Biosphere Reserve and 
43.6 million hectares in the Mexican Pacific Deep Biosphere Reserve.
\0xEF Mexico has guiding documents on seas and coasts, such as the 20162030 National Strategy and Action Plan on Mexican Biodiversity, the 2016-2022 Integration Strategy for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Biodiversity in the Fishing and Aquaculture Sector and the National Oceanographic Research Program.
\0xEF SEMARNATis Clean Beaches Program monitors water quality and the Letis Clean Up Mexico Initiative organizes brigades to clean up public spaces, including rivers and beaches.
\0xEF Blue Flag certification of Mexican beaches (35 beaches and 2 marinas) establishes standards on quality, safety, education and environmental information. 
\0xEF The prohibition of gill nets in the Upper Gulf of California contributes to the protection of marine fauna.
\0xEF Participatory Environmental Vigilance Committees care for and defend the natural resources of their communities.
CHALLENGES 
\0xEF Guaranteeing that national planning has a comprehensive approach to watershed management to prevent the pollution of oceans via terrestrial sources.
\0xEF Expanding the capacity for conducting inspections and demanding compliance with the law in industrial sectors responsible for pollution.
81
\0xEF Generating nationwide estimates on the magnitude of the impact and threat of coastal degradation caused by the use of agrochemicals, the exploitation of energy sources and maritime transport.
\0xEF Modifying legislation on the conservation and preservation of marine and coastal zones to ensure coherence and compliance.
\0xEF Designing a General Law on the Comprehensive Management of Coastal and Marine Areas and a Regulation for the General Law on Sustainable Fishing and Aquaculture.
\0xEF Undertaking scientific research to gather information on the health of the oceans that will help orient decisions.
\0xEF Establishing a permanent system to evaluate the management of marine Natural Protected Areas.
4.4 MEANS AND PARTNERSHIPS FOR IMPLEMENTING THE 2030 AGENDA 
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable development.
Under the framework of its international development cooperation efforts, Mexico has worked on all aspects of financing for development, such as tax collection, debt sustainability, trade and investment. This has meant strengthening alliances with developed countries, international organizations and multilateral development banks, as well as other development actors, with the goal of mobilizing resources and obtaining knowledge to meet the SDGs.
ADVANCES
\0xEF Over the last five years, Mexico has granted an average of 250 million dollars each year for international development cooperation.
\0xEF In 2017, Mexico had 12 free trade agreements with 46 countries, giving it access to a market of 1.172 billion consumers around the world (SE, 2017).
\0xEF In 2017, non-petroleum exports represented 93.1% of total exports (SE, 2017).
EMBLEMATIC ACTIONS
\0xEF The creation of the Alliance for Sustainability (AxS) between AMEXCID and the private sector.

\0xEF The Program for the Prevention of Unaccompanied Migration by Children and Adolescents in the Northern Triangle of Central America has been undertaken by Mexico and Germany to benefit the Northern Triangle of Central America.
\0xEF The Open Government Partnership promotes gender equality, transparency, accountability, citizen participation and innovation as tools for better governability.
\0xEF The Strategy for Promoting Public-Private Partnerships complements the governmentis efforts to develop infrastructure and provide goods and services demanded by society.
\0xEF Mexico has an Action Plan under the framework of the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children. This initiative is promoted by a variety of actors, including governments, international organizations and civil society, and aims to reduce child abuse and exploitation.
\0xEF At the multilateral level, Mexico signed on to Resolution 77/242, \0xECThe Impact of Rapid Technological Change on the Achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals, which establishes that the United Nations, in collaboration with academia, civil society and the private sector, must analyze the impact of rapid technological change, artificial intelligence and automatization on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
CHALLENGES
\0xEF Earmarking additional expenses in the budget for knowledge exchanges with other countries and strengthening inter-institutional coordination.
\0xEF Updating trade regulations and the legal framework to ensure consistency between national and international regulations, as well as that Mexican products and services meet the standards demanded in other markets.
\0xEF Strengthening the governmentis capacity to process paperwork and promoting closer collaborations between the government, academia, the private sector, civil society and other development actors in a way that goes beyond each presidential administration.
MEANS OF IMPLEMENTING THE SDGs
In Mexico, the first step towards mobilizing resources that contribute to reaching the SDGs has been to link public spending with the 2030 Agenda. This has allowed us to identify critical lacunae and evaluate the resources needed to delineate a budgetary planning strategy focused on sustainable development.
As part of the national strategy to mobilize financial resources in order to meet the SDGs, the OPR, in collaboration with other federal agencies, is working on three lines of action: 
1. Modifying fiscal policy in terms of revenue generation.
2. Modifying fiscal policy in terms of spending.
3. Mobilizing national resources. 
 
In a complementary fashion, the OPR is promoting a proposal to introduce green, social and sustainable bonds in Mexico, that will also contribute to compliance with the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement.
At the global level, with the goal of contributing to dialogue and promoting positive results at the Forum on Financing for Development and following up on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, Mexico has been the site of three retreats of the Group of Friends in Monterrey, Mexico City (2016 and 2017), and Oaxaca (2018). This is a space for dialogue that addresses international commitments that contribute to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the mobilization of all sources of financing.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION FOR IMPLEMENTING THE SDGs
Mexico participates in international development cooperation through AMEXCID. One of its functions is to contribute to the exchange of good practices and skills through bilateral, regional, multilateral, north-south, southsouth and triangular cooperation mechanisms. AMEXCID has taken on the responsibility of aligning the cooperation accepted and offered by Mexico with the 2030 Agenda, as well as incentivizing the participation of various international development cooperation actors.
Over the last five years, Mexico has granted an average of 250 million dollars each year for international development cooperation. In 2017, Mexico carried out 595 international development cooperation projects in fields connected to the SDGs, such as climate action, education, health and energy, among others. 
Another tool that contributes to reaching the SDGs is the Catalog of Mexican Capacities, which was prepared by AMEXCID and other institutions to provide information on best practices and incentivize the offer of international development cooperation: it currently includes 110 initiatives. Mexico has also created alliances with Central American and Caribbean countries, particularly on issues such as climate change and resilience, as well as with Germany, Canada, Spain, the United States of America, France, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and European Union member states. It also cooperates with international agencies that have a presence in Mexico, multilateral development banks and other development actors.
Mexico has given special importance to the creation of regional and thematic strategies to increase the impact of Mexican cooperation in Latin America and the Caribbean, such as the cooperation strategy for the Northern Triangle of Central America, which was launched following the successes seen in the Mesoamerican Project and the Conference on Prosperity and Security in Central America (2017); the Hunger-Free Mesoamerica Program, which has become a reference for the rest of Latin America; the Mexico-CARICOM Strategy for Comprehensive Disaster Risk Management, Resilience and Reconstruction; the Franco-Mexican Initiative to support adaptation and resilience to climate change in the Caribbean; and the strategy for designing and presenting projects from Caribbean countries to the Green Climate Fund (GCF) and the Global Environmental Fund (GEF).
In regional terms, Mexico belongs to the Forum of Latin American and Caribbean Countries on Sustainable Development (FPALCDS), a regional mechanism for following up on the 2030 Agenda and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. 
Within the framework of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), Mexico has promoted the establishment of a network to strengthen the ability of countries to implement and follow up on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in the region. This network has the goal of sharing experiences and strengthening institutional and technical capacities of governments, which will help align international cooperation strategies with the SDGs.
Mexico participated in the OECD publication titled Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development 2018: Towards Sustainable and Resilient Societies, which collects the experiences of many countries and the institutional agreements for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda.
Mexico also participated in the first round of the Voluntary Peer Learning Mechanism on the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda. As part of this process, Mexico participated in two groups, one with Germany and China on the alignment of national strategies and policy coherence for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, and another with Norway and the Netherlands on the role of the private sector. These sessions were held between September 2017 and April 2018 and resulted in the preparation of two documents, which will be presented to the development working group at the 2018 G20 summit in Argentina.
PARTNERSHIPS
Mexico has many national alliances that fall under the framework of the 2030 Agenda, 
such as the Alliance for Sustainability, CONAGOis 2030 Agenda Executive Implementation Commission and the Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), which will be launched under the oversight of the UNAM in 2018.
tional CSOs that has the goal of implement-
86
In terms of partnerships with CSOs, there is the International Coalition for Development Action Mexico (CAIDMEX), an alliance between domestic and Mexico-based internaing the SDGs. Outreach has also been made to the Civil Society Coordinating Space for Following Up on the 2030 Agenda in Mexico, among others. Despite the existence of these spaces for collaboration among CSOs, more partnerships between the government and CSOs under the framework of the 2030 Agenda should be institutionalized.
At the international level, Mexico is a member of a variety of alliances, such as the German governmentis Partners for Review network, which monitors the SDGs; the Partnering for Green Growth and the Global Goals 2030 network, which supports public-private partnerships for the implementation of the SDGs; the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which seeks to share experiences with international development cooperation; the Global Partnership to End Violence Against Children, which contributes to the implementation of SDGs 16 and 17; the NDC Partnership, which aims to improve cooperation on SDG 13; and the Pacific Alliance (which includes Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru), which is working towards the establishment of sustainability criteria for public acquisitions.



V. CONCLUSIONS 

5.1 STATE COMMITMENT AND CONTINUITY
Ever since Mexico assumed the 2030 Agenda as a state commitment, it has undertaken many measures for its implementation. Through political will at the highest level, the groundwork has been laid to ensure the continuity of these transformations over time. The process of preparing a National Strategy with objectives, goals and priorities that are defined through a shared diagnostic and the participation of different sectors has laid out the path towards the future.
Nevertheless, many major challenges remain. It is necessary to strengthen capacities at all levels to eliminate asymmetries and work towards achieving a shared vision. Sustainable development not only requires efforts from all sectors, but above all, the commitment of all parties to remain in collaboration.
Another challenge is the adoption of the 2030 Agenda by all actors. To confront this, it is essential to improve outreach, awareness and mobilization efforts for the SDGs. Mechanisms are also needed that facilitate the participation of state and municipal governments. Achieving these goals depends on the existence of partnerships and collaborations, as well as coordination between different levels of government.
Placing people at the center of all actions ensures a bottom-up transformation founded on trust and alliance-building. Only based on evidence, we will be able to find the best ways to transform our development reality. Defining, updating and disaggregating indicators for following up on the SDGs is essential to evaluating the impact of policies. Innovation requires new sources of information, technologies and big data,27 as well as comprehensive financing for economic, social and environmental development.
27 National averages may hide inequalities. For this reason, it is essential to disaggregate data when monitoring and evaluating progress on goals. Furthermore, though big data can be useful, it is vital to leave no one behind and to ensure the representation of all members of society when measuring advancement towards the SDGs. Many sources of data require literacy and access to the internet or cellular services, which can exclude vulnerable groups. Big data should therefore be used with care, and only in combination with other sources of information that guarantee the representation of all members of society. This disaggregation requires the perspectives of statistical experts, civil society organizations, national human rights institutions, service providers and marginalized populations.
90
The success of these paths will lie not only in their ability to lead to concrete actions that contribute to sustainability, but also in their capacity to constantly transform themselves in accordance with new realities. 
5.2 NEXT STEPS
In accordance with the National Council for the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Developmentis yearly program of activities, approved on May 31, 2018, the initial draft of the National Strategy for the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda will be submitted for public review. This document will define priorities, goals, indicators and challenges, as well as the roles and functions of different actors, incorporating the vision of different sectors. Inter-institutional working groups will also be created to hold discussions on goals and indicators that will be based on the inputs provided by the Specialized Technical Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals (CTEODS) and the contributions of a variety of sectors.
The National Strategy could also be consolidated as a tool to be used as a base for elaborating the 2019-2024 National Development Plan and future federal budgets. Furthermore, to ensure that the 2030 Agenda becomes a reality at the state and municipal levels, it is important for the OSIs to have practical tools that allow them to transform the territories under their jurisdiction.
To the historic challenges of Mexicois different regions, we can add the efforts to protect natural resources and mitigate the adverse effects of climate change. The rise in global temperatures will only remain below 2\0x222BC if we reduce fossil fuel use and transform systems of consumption and production around the world.
Lastly, it is also necessary to be increasingly ambitious when implementing the 2030 Agenda. To achieve this, instead of being barries, we must make accelerated technological change, artificial intelligence and automatization into enablers of sustainable development.
