Afghanistan as a sovereign and independent state is fully committed to attaining the SDGs. The 2030 Development Agenda is a milestone in the recent history of the United Nations. This comprehensive strategy can help the member nations to overcome the socio-economic, environmental and security challenges that confront them. 
The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) effort of Afghanistan was limited by the problematic context of economic, political and security challenges, although Afghanistan included an additional goal related to security, given its specific context. Nonetheless the MDGs established a positive trajectory for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This optimistic assertion is validated by the progress achieved against the benchmarks and indicators set by the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework (TMAF), and the Brussel Conference on Afghanistan (BCA). Considering the lessons learned from the MDGs process, GoIRA can now more realistically integrate the SDGsi targets into its strategic planning processes such as the Afghanistan National Development Framework (ANPDF). 
The long-lasting armed conflict in Afghanistan has been weakening government institutions and decreasing economic performances, negatively impacting the employment, increasing inequality and public services distribution. Conflict tends to increase the gap between the people and government institutions; youth is therefore drawn to joining anti-government elements and to fighting against the government, creating an environment of escalating violence across the country. The vicious cycle of conflict intensifies poverty, which further feeds conflict and insecurity. 
In terms of revenue generation and income per-capita, Afghanistan is a poor country. Majority of its population is either directly or indirectly involved in agriculture and livestock sector and dependent to agriculture and maintain their daily basic needs from this source. The long-term vision of Agriculture and Rural Development is to ensure the social, economic and political well-being of rural communities, especially poor and vulnerable people, whilst stimulating the integration of rural communities with in the national economy. 
The ANPDF was developed to overcome the legacies of conflict and ideological distortions that have stunted institutional development in Afghanistan. With focused and sustained commitment, a more comprehensive approach to policy formulation and management can deliver results. But just as Government policies evolve, the challenges themselves are not static. Afghanistan is now facing a new challenge, which is a steady reduction in external support for its reform agenda. 
If the 2030 Agenda is to help Afghanistan to overcome the structurally persistent problems of poverty, inequality and insecurity, then it requires dedicated partnership with private sector, development partners, international communities, civil society organizations and other relevant stakeholders.  
Considering Afghanistan Sustainable Development Goals (A-SDGs), necessary institutional, regulatory and incentive framework to increase production and productivity will be established to create an enabling environment to remove the obstacles on the way to sustainable development. 
1. Progress made against the Agenda 2030:  
- The 2030 agenda is globally recognized and 193 countries are committed to implement this initiative. GoIRA is one of the active member of the UN and its policy is to align the A-SDGsi targets and indicators with national policies, strategies and development plans. 
- In nationalization process, we have divided the 17 goals into 8-socio-economic sectors to simplify planning and implementation process for the respective line ministries and agencies. Government agencies are working to align all the A-SDGs targets and indicators with their development plans and policies.  
- Partnership is the key for successful implementation of the SDGs, therefore, GoIRA is working in close coordination with development partners, private sector, civil society organizations, international communities, academia, media and all relevant stakeholders.  
2. Challenges Ahead 
- Financing the SDGs: SDGs will require substantial resources, given Afghanistanis financial instability and dependence vis-\0x2021-vis the international community, innovative funding mechanisms will be required to achieve the SDGs.  
- Formalizing partnerships: Afghanistanis efforts towards the achievement of the Agenda 2030 will require dedicated partnerships between the Government, civil society organizations and private sector actors, in close cooperation with the United Nations and international partners.  
- Localization of SDGs: At this stage, the emphasis has been put on the nationalization of the SDGs. Nonetheless, efforts will be made to build awareness on the SDGs and adjust the national targets and indicators at provincial level. 
- Data Availability and Management: Data collection, analysis and dissemination will be challenging. Efforts will be made to build a comprehensive database that will make available all SDGs-related information and will facilitate the disaggregation of data.  
Monitoring & Evaluation Framework: the availability and proper use of data are prerequisites for a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework, that will be required to report on Afghanistanis progress against the Agenda 2030.  
 
 
  

After decades of conflict in Afghanistan, the international community assisted the shattered nation to organize new frameworks for governance, society and the economy. Despite the fragile nature of that process, GoIRA took the bold step to sign the Millennium Declaration and pledged to attain the MDGs by 2020. The aspiration of human rights for all was especially attractive to war-weary Afghanistan; ensuring every individualis right to dignity, freedom, equality, a basic standard of living, and freedom from hunger and violence.  
The MDGs commitment proved difficult for GoIRA to implement. Data collection was problematic due to an initial lack of technical capacity, inadequate resources and insecure conditions. Nonetheless, the Central Statistics Organization and line ministries collected as much data as possible and submitted a 10-year MDGs progress report in 2015.2 The data analyses reflected Afghanistanis position vis-a-vis the set targets, relative to the initial baseline conditions. The data showed the absolute progress that had been achieved. From the global perspective, the MDGs progress of Afghanistan might look small, but it reflects a determination in achieving goals that was severely constrained by available resources and capacities. 
Afghanistan must keep track of its progress towards the realization of the SDGs, but also towards the MDGs and the implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020, adopted by the Fourth UN Conference on the Least Developed Countries, held in Istanbul on 9-13 May 2011. The objectives of the SDGs and of the Istanbul Programme of Action (IPoA) are cross-cutting and both should eventually see the LDCs achieve sustainable development; supporting the means of implementation of one will fuel realization of the other. 
Based on the Afghanistan agriculture production trend analysis, Afghanistan is a food deficit country. In a typical year Afghanistanis cereal deficit is estimated over one million tons. In a poor agriculture year this number can reach up to two million tons. Such variation is caused by below normal rainfall during March to June, crucial for the development of rain fed crops. The import trend analysis is mostly consistent with production trend with the exception of 2012, 2013 and 2014 where production figures indicate self-sufficiency, which is likely to be a positive skew of production analysis. 
Poverty and inequality within the country remain major issues. In 2015, 36 per cent of the Afghan people still lived below the poverty line3 while discrimination against vulnerable groups, including women and ethnic minorities, remained a concerning challenge, despite significant progress made in the context of the MDGs.4  
This country must plan to move beyond its history of war and poverty and begin the long journey to prosperity. The ANPDF presents a long-term development narrative for Afghanistan by providing consistent high-level guidance to government, and other, stakeholders. It articulates our immediate and long term development priorities, highlights key reforms, and outlines priority investments needed to achieve the SDGs in these critical areas.  
Considering the tenuous nature of socio-economic development in Afghanistan, the nation needs the continuous support of international partners, civil society organizations, private sector and regional cooperation to fulfill SDGsi commitments for 2030. 
 
Socio-Economic Update: 

 
 
 
 	 

The nationalization process of the SDGsi targets and indicators started with series of national consultation conferences, seminars, meetings and workshops. The ambitious global targets and indicators have been critically reviewed by different stakeholders in the country with realization of national context and circumstances. The global ambitious targets and indicators have been refined and nationalized with great efforts of different stakeholders in the country. Out national consultation process reshaped the global targets and indicators into 125 national targets and 190 national indicators. 


The GoIRA has decided that if the A-SDGs are to be accountable, effective and transparent, the A-SDGs programme should be incorporated into the budget planning process in the national and subnational level for the annual development projects. The 17 goals have been divided into 8-socio-economic sectors, in order to clarify the SDGs Agenda for the respective line ministries. Each of these ministries has been tasked to coordinate with other ministries involved in the implementation of the various targets under each goal. Each ministry is to submit a SDGs account in its budget proposal in order to be funded for the necessary activities to achieve its SDGs targets. MoEc is then charged to report and assess these efforts in its SDGs progress reports. 


2018-2030



o Implementation of 
  SDGs o M&E Reporting on 
SDGs

Based on our experience, strong engagement of stakeholders lead to vibrant awarenessraising campaigns and that needs to be carried out at both national and subnational levels, mobilizing and building partnerships with different local stakeholders, bringing together all sectors of society, boosting their participation and ensuring that diversity is encompassed. Afghanistan believes that the sub-national levels of government are key policy makers in the government structure and they are the one who analyze and prioritize the needs of our society the government should then make decisions based on their analysis. 
The Ministry of Economy of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan has conducted series of constructive consultation and awareness-raising programs for the provincial departments and influential stakeholders at the subnational level and those programs had a crucial impact on the planning process of the subnational budget entities. Subnational government institutions will bridge the gap between the central governments and communities and will play a strong role in fostering the involvement of civil society organizations, the private sector, academia and other community-based organizations. The SDGsi global targets and indicators have been nationalized and table below shows the number of national targets and indicators. 



National Sectors
Security Sector
Education Sector
Health Sector
Governance Sector
Infrastructure Sector
Social Protection Sector
Agriculture and Rural Dev. Sector
Economic Sector
Total Number


National Targets



National Indicators




11 Targets
14 Targets
12 Targets
2 Targets
29 Targets
18 Targets
20 Targets
28 Targets
125 Targets



13 indicators
30 indicators
21 indicators
5 indicators
34 indicators
29 indicators
20 indicators
37 indicators
190 indicators




In terms of political will and decision making, the High Council of Ministers oversees and supervises the nationalization, alignment and implementation process of the SDGs in the country. The Council makes sure that all budget entities have fully included the SDGs targets and indicators in their development strategies and policies. 
The SDGs Secretariat has been established within the Ministry of Economy (MoEc). The Ministry has been entrusted by the Government to work on the national documentation of the SDGs programme, to coordinate the development efforts of various sectors, and to report on these efforts semi-annually and annually to the High Council of Ministers and the Cabinet.  
The SDGs Secretariat has organized the nationalization, alignment, implementation and monitoring processes into a series of specialized groups that include the SDGs National Coordination Commission, the SDGs Secretariat, the Technical Coordination Committees, the Technical Working Groups, and the SDGs High-Level Board. 
To speed up the implementation of the SDGs and to ensure that reporting against the national indicators and targets takes place consistently, an Executive Committee on the SDGs will be established within the Office of the Chief Executive to issue recommendations and practical solutions to the Economic Committee of the Council of Ministers, chaired by the Ministry of Economy. It will oversee the overall coordination to attain the SDGs within the overall aegis of ANPDF, the New Deal implementation plan and the National Priority Programmes (NPPs). 
The Executive Committee on the SDGs will also provide a high-level platform for direct and sustained engagement between the various government stakeholders, the private sector, civil society organizations and the international community.   
Every country has its own unique challenges while implementing the 2030 Agenda. Afghanistan struggles with two persistent public sector deficits of capacity and financing. To compound the difficulties, terrorism and narcotics threaten the viability of the state. It is collective efforts such as the SDGs programme that will deter these phenomena in Afghanistan  from threatening the security, stability and development in the region and the world. 
The nationalization process of the SDGs was guided by a high level of principles and ambitions, and Afghanistan has taken the necessary steps into account to make the global targets and indicators consistent and achievable in our national context and circumstances. 
The Ministry of Economy, as the lead and coordinator entity for the A-SDGs, established the required task forces from high-level authorities, experts, leading ministries, supporting agencies, the National Statistics Organization, UN country team, development partners and different relevant stakeholders while beginning a national consultation process on A-SDGs in November 2015. 
All government bodies were asked to provide evidence- based priorities and relevant indicators in line with SDGs targets and indicators. 
The technical thematic working groups on different sectors with cross cutting issues of human rights, gender equality, social inclusion; economic growth and environment protection have initiated their work on the SDGs. The working mechanism for the SDGs nationalization process has started with the creation of various specialized offices and groups. 
SDGs Secretariat: The SDGs Secretariat works under the supervision of the MoEc General Directorate of Policy. The office coordinates the SDGs nationalization process and has 20 employees in its administrative structure. 
SDGs Executive Committee: Co-chaired by the Ministry of Economy, the Office of the Chief Executive and UNDP, the core focuses of the Executive Committee on SDGs will be on: 
- Whole of Government support to the Ministry of Economy and policy advice on proposed SDGs implementation mechanisms; 
- Cross-sectorial coordination to accelerate SDGs implementation; 
- Oversight of the achievement and progress of nationalized SDGs targets and indicators. 
National Coordination Committee: The active members in this commission are ministers and deputy ministers of the government budget entities. This commission deals with the political issues of SDGs nationalization and implementation.  
Technical Coordination Committees: These committees have been established from all leading agencies of the government. The committees are mainly comprised of policy directors and technical staff who are closely engaged in policy development at their agency. Each committee focuses on issues that arise in the data process and other unforeseen challenges in the implementation phase. 
Technical Working Groups: The groups are comprised of representatives from leading sectoral agencies and different relevant stakeholders. They work on data collection, data verification, preparing progress reports and A-SDGs national document.    
A-SDGs High Level Board: The SDGs High Level Board, includes the Minister of Economy, Deputy Ministers of MoEc, the SDGs national focal point, UNDP Country Director and the UNDP SDGs Project Manager. The Board is responsible to assess and supervise the technical, financial and political status of the SDGs coordination, nationalization and implementation processes. 
Leading Agencies: Leading agencies work closely with all stakeholders, specifically with the relevant budget entities who are the real implementers of the A-SDGs targets and indicators. There are several other ministries and agencies who will work on the implementation of this goal along with various development partners such as Asia Development Bank. 
Supporting Agencies: Various government budget entities and development partners directly and indirectly support the implementation of the A-SDGs. Working group structure has shown in the below shape. 
 


The Preparation of this report required hard work and a comprehensive assessment of national efforts. The A-SDGs secretariat has conducted a series of consultation meetings, workshops, and bilateral discussions with different stakeholders (civil society organizations, private sector, NGOs, gender related entities and government institutions) to get their feedbacks on every Governmentis steps regarding the A-SDGs nationalization and preparation of the present report. Government bodies have contributed to greater coherence and ownership of the follow-up process in the preparation. The message of ownership has been constantly reinforced so that all stakeholders understood that the A-SDGs are a national priority agenda for development. 
Specific terms of references and areas of engagement have been developed for stakeholders. Government leading agencies as direct implementer of the A-SDGs goals and targets, were actively engaged in the process of report preparation. The information in this report is based on the series of technical consultations, desk review of different development reports produced by the Government institutions, the World Bank, the Central Statistical Organization (CSO), the Asian Development Bank, the IMF and UN publications and websites. The coordination process of the A-SDGs is shown in the below 


The Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework is the Governmentis plan to achieve self- reliance and increase the welfare of our people. We will build a productive and broad- based economy that creates jobs. We will establish the rule of law and put an end to corruption, criminality, and violence. Justice and the rule of law require that we step up the fight against corruption, reform our courts, and make sure that ordinary citizens can exert their constitutional rights with confidence. We will make strategic investments in infrastructure, human capital, quality service delivery, and technology; backed by a robust and well-regulated financial sector that can channel money to where it can best be spent. Growth will be inclusive and balanced. As the economy grows, Afghanistan will be able to expand investments in the health and education of our people. Achieving these goals requires a collective effort to overcome fragmentation, increase accountability, and introduce proper policies for sustainable growth.4  
The GoIRA can improve its efforts for socio-economic sustainable development by undertaking a more systematic review of the SDG efforts of other developing nations. The Government welcomes capacity building initiatives by the UN and other international partners to provide earmarked support and the associated funding to line ministries. 
The A-SDGs Secretariat at the MoEc will continue to deploy awareness programs and technical workshops for different stakeholders. These traditional means of communication will be coupled with new technologies, such as social media, to spread the message as well as implementing the process of data collection. The diversity of outreach and implementation tools and their effectiveness will reassure the international partners of Afghanistan of the effectiveness of its A-SDGs program. 
The A-SDGs Secretariat at the MoEc will continue to deploy awareness programs and technical workshops for different stakeholders. These traditional means of communication will be coupled with new technologies, such as social media, to spread the message as well as implementing the process of data collection. The diversity of outreach and implementation tools and their effectiveness will reassure the international partners of Afghanistan of the effectiveness of its A-SDGs program.  
The A-SDGs Secretariat has engaged all national and international stakeholders in the nationalization process of the SDG targets and indicators. GoIRA supports funding modalities that foster stronger collaboration among civil society, academia, youths, gender entities, the business sector, development partners, UN agencies and other relevant institutions. In order to achieve effective and efficient programming, the involved stakeholders must emphasize coordination between themselves as well as alignment of their efforts to the A-SDGs targets and indicators. 
Creating Ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals   

Sense of ownership over the sustainable development goals has been created through the national consultation processes that have been initiated from the beginning of 2016. This process was supported by the government budget entities and national and international stakeholders in the country. Inter-ministerial consultations within the working groups (National and Technical Consultation Working Groups) for Sustainable Development enabled the defining of national positions within the inter-agencies and ministerial negotiations on A-SDGs based on the inputs from the relevant institutions. 
The A-SDGs Secretariat is entrusted with ensuring the broadest national participation in the A-SDGs program and promoting a sense of ownership among the national stakeholders. Ministries, experts, and institutions in the public sector, local self- governments, the parliament, the academia, the civil society organizations and the business community took an active part in the nationalization process of the SDGs and the relevant set of sustainable development tasks in which the results was A-SDGs targets and indicators. 
On the other hand, as A-SDGs all indicators are aligned with the work of UN agencies currently implementing activities related to end hunger and food security i.e. UNFAO, WFP and WHO and other related national and international organizations that will need to achieve sufficient coordination and cooperation during the implementation phase of the ASDGs. 
Awareness-raising and Involving Stakeholders  

Few examples of in-country events: 
* December 26, 2016: Seminar on SDGs held at Dunya University. More than 300 participants, including 130 women, attended presentations on A-SDGs made by representatives of the Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Parliament and UNDP. 
* February 4-5, 2017: Workshop organized at Kabul University by the Ministry of Economy with support of UNDP, in association with AIESEC Afghanistan. 330 students, including 180 women, participated in the workshop and the targets and indicators for nine SDGs were presented to them. 
* April 20, 2017: Youth Thinkers Society and the Ministry of Economy successfully  organized a three day National Youth Symposium. This Symposium focused on six goals. 600 people from different sectors participated. 
* May 15, 2017: Symposium on SDGs conducted at the American University of Afghanistan with more than 300 students participating. 
* May 17, 2017: Workshop on SDGs conducted at Katib University, Kabul, Afghanistan. More than 260 students and teachers participating. 
Incorporation of the A-SDGs in National Frameworks  

The GoIRA presented its \0xEBNational Peace and Development Frameworki at the 2016 Brussels Conference on Afghanistan. The overall scope of this framework is to \0xECchange the structure of our economy from one of import and distribution to one where a thriving private sector from small farmers and urban businesses to large manufacturers can successfully export Afghan products to regional and global markets. Afghanistan will make strategic investments in infrastructure, human capital, quality service delivery, and technology; backed by a robust and well-regulated financial sector that can channel money to where it can best be spent. International Communities pledged totaling $15.2 billion for five years (2017-2021).5 
Generally, the government policy is to align the A-SDGsi targets and indicators with national policies, strategies and development plans. There are around 10 National Priority Programmes including; i) Private Sector Development Program; ii) The Citizenis Charter; iii) Effective Governance Program; iv) Justice Sector Reform Program; v) Comprehensive Agricultural Development Program; vi) Infrastructure and Connectivity Program; vii) Urban Development Program; Energy; viii) National Mineral and Resources Development Program; ix) Human Capital Development; and x) Womenis Economic Empowerment Program. The SDGs alignment sequence with development plans is show below. 

 
SDG # 
Goals in Brief 
ANPDF Programs 
Status / 
Comments 
SDG 1 
End poverty 
Citizenis Charter, Comprehensive Agriculture NPP, Jobs for Peace 
Approx 12,000 communities phase 1 
SDG 2 
Food security, end hunger 
Comprehensive Agricultural NPP, National Saffron Programme, Construction of Green house and Cool Storages 
2017 launched 
SDG 3 
Healthy lives 
Human Capital NPP 
Ongoing 
SDG 4 
Education for all 
Human Capital NPP, Vocational and 
Technical Programs, National Skills Dev 
Programmes (NSDPs) 
Ongoing 
SDG 5 
Achieve gender equality 
Economic Empowerment of Women NPP, 1325 program 
2017 launched 
SDG 6  
Water and Sanitation for all 
Citizen's Charter, National National 
Water Management Programme, 
National Infrastructure Implementation Plan (NIP) 
2016 launched 
SDG 7 
Energy for all 
Regional Economic Cooperation 
Programmes on Energy (CASA 1000, 
TUTAP, TAPI), Energy and 
Infrastructure Development,  
Advance Regional Integration 
Ongoing 
SDG 8 
Promote growth and employment 
National Economic Zones, Citizen 
Charter, IMF reforms, Mineral and 
Resource Development Programmes, Increasing labor productivity and investment in human capital,  
Urban Development Programme 
ECF signed July, 2016 
SDG 9 
Build resilient infrastructure, promote industrialization 
MUDH reform, WTO accession, NIP, 
National Water Management Programme, Railways Infrastructure programmes, New Initiative for Industrialization 
2016 
SDG 11 
Make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
Urban NPP, National Solidarity 
Programmes (NSPs), Citizen Charter, National Housing Programs 
2017 launched 
SDG 16 
Reduce IDPs 
\0xECThe Way Forward IDPs/returnees strategy 
Ongoing 
SDG 17 
Total aid per capita 
ANDPF fiscal strategy 
2020 projections 
A-SDGs & Development Plans Alignment Table  

 
 
 

At the country level, Afghanistan has developed many policies, strategies and frameworks including Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS) 2008-2013. This national strategy served as Afghanistanis Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) and used the pillars, principles and benchmarks of the Afghanistan Compact as a foundation. Poverty reduction is an ultimate goal of economic development for the Government of Afghanistan. The ANDS highlighted poverty alleviation and addressed the basic needs of vulnerable and impoverished segments of the society. 
Currently, the planning and budgeting process in national and sub-national levels using the same paradigm and methodologies as the ANDS official structure. The ANDS was consisted of 3 pillars, 8 main sectors, 17 sub-sectors, 86 outcomes and 276 development indicators. Therefore, we have mainstreamed the 17-Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) into 8 main sectors of the ANDS, in order to help government institutions to align their development priorities and budget allocation for new development programs with the A-SDGs targets and indicators. The pillars or main goals of the ANDS are: 
Security: Achieve nationwide stabilization, strengthen law enforcement, and improve personal security for every Afghan.   
Governance, Rule of Law and Human Rights: Strengthen democratic processes and institutions, human rights, the rule of law, delivery of public services and government accountability.  
Economic and Social Development: Reduce poverty, ensure sustainable development through a private-sector-led market economy, improve human development indicators, and make significant progress towards the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  

The ANPDF is a 5-year strategic plan for achieving self-reliance, promoting sustainable job creation to improve public welfare and support Afghanistanis progress towards achieving A-SDGs. Hence it details standards on inclusion, gender equity, regional balance, and other development goals that provide a basis for making decisions and assessing results. The framework focused on creating jobs, increasing yield and opening markets for farmers through various investment programs. Few of which are mentioned below;  
* Increasing horticulture capacity from 180,000 to 230,000 hectares, supporting investments in value-chains, establishing export certification procedures, increasing support to women owned agri-businesses;  
* Increasing investment in water management, with rehabilitation of more than 1,000 irrigation schemes, developing new irrigation networks and building small water reservoirs;  
* Implementing the national wheat program to increase yields to 26%, adding 110,000 hectares of land under cultivation, halving post-harvest losses, and developing a standardized wheat seed market; The five-year program of MAIL is expecting and increase in wheat production up to approximately 5.9 million MT.  
* Improving livestock management, applying Phyto-sanitary entry criteria and WTOallowed tariffs to prevent subsidized imports from competing with Afghanistanis smallholders;  
* Rehabilitating the strategic grain reserve and establishing a Grain Reserve Board to support farmers;  
* Expanding agroforestry and reforestation with over 60,000 hectares that support environmental conservation and income generation for farmers; and  
* Restructuring the Ministry of Agriculture to become a decentralized and farmer-centric institution that regulated and encourages private investments.   

The 2030 Agenda commits the global community to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions: economic, social and environmental in a balanced and integrated manner.  
Sustainable development seeks to combine greater economic prosperity and social justice with a healthy environment, in order to improve the overall wellbeing and stability of our societies. Therefore, Afghanistan as a fragile and least developed country, designed and formulated its national development framework and national priority programs (NPPs) in the way that all three dimensions of sustainable development goals can easily get integrated into it. We are working on formulation of standard concepts, mechanisms and strategies to ensure policy coherence and the integration of various dimensions of sustainable development goals into our development plans. This effort will require efficient financial support from our development partners and technical support from national and international stakeholders. 
 
 
 
 

For better and smooth implementation of the SDGs in Afghanistan, we have conducted series of conferences, seminars, workshops and symposiums. Based on national context and circumstances, we have divided the SDGs into 8-budgetary sectors for better alignment and implementation. 
With having lots of development and tangible achievements during the nationalization process of the SDGs, our findings show that still there are some bottlenecks in terms of data availability, realistic baseline and annual targets for the national indicators. Therefore, we need to work very hard to align A-SDGs national targets and indicators with our development policies, plans and strategies. The following table shows the national targets and indicators. 




National Sectors



National Targets



National Indicators




Security Sector
Education Sector
Health Sector
Governance Sector
Infrastructure Sector
Social Protection Sector
Agriculture and Rural Dev. Sector
Economic Sector
Total Number



11 Targets
14 Targets
12 Targets
2 Targets
29 Targets
18 Targets
20 Targets
28 Targets
125 Targets



13 indicators
30 indicators
21 indicators
5 indicators
34 indicators
29 indicators
20 indicators
37 indicators
190 indicators



SDGs 
Global Targets  
National Targets  
Global Indicators 
National Indicators 
Goal 1 
7 
5 
12 
6 
Goal 2 
8 
8 
14 
17 
Goal 3 
13 
11 
26 
18 
Goal 5 
9 
6 
14 
8 
Goal 9 
8 
7 
12 
15 
Goal 17 
19 
16 
25 
23 
Number of global and national targets and indicators
 

 
Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
The manifesto of Goal 1 is to \0xECEnd poverty in all its forms everywhere by 2030, where the international poverty line is currently set at $1.90 per-day using 2011 United States dollar purchasing power parity (PPP). SDG 1 further aims at ensuring social protection for the poor and vulnerable, increase access to basic services and support people harmed by climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters. 
In 2002, the proportion of the worldis population living below the poverty line dropped by half, from 26 per cent to 13 per cent; good news for rest of world but this global trend was not reflected in Afghanistan. Because escaping extreme poverty needs extraordinary efforts and resources, it create huge challenges for Least Developed Countries (LDCs). Furthermore, escaping poverty for Afghan people is more difficult due to conflict; as Poverty and conflict are widely understood to be closely interconnected and considered as two faces of one coin. Recently, the conflict has been escalating across Afghanistan and the percentage of people living under the poverty line has increased from 35.8 percent in 2011-2012 to 39.1 percent in 2013-14, representing approximately 1.3 million additional Afghans living in poverty. 
The armed conflict in Afghanistan is weakening government institutions and decreasing economic performances, negatively impacting the employment, increasing inequality and public services distribution. Conflict tends to increase the gap between the people and government institutions; youth is therefore drawn to joining anti-government elements and to fighting against the government, creating an environment of escalating violence across the country. The vicious cycle of conflict intensifies poverty,  which further feeds conflict and insecurity. 
The transition period from 2012 to 2014 leading to the election of 2014, associated with the transfer of responsibility from international security forces to Afghan forces and the decrease in international spending, has deepened the roots of the conflict in Afghanistan; this situation increased poverty across Afghanistan. As conflict intensified and spread through the country, internal displacement reached a new high, further exacerbating the structural poverty and work challenges Afghan households face. According to the latest United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) data, about 
2.9 million Afghans are \0xECinternally displaced, 22 percent of whom fled their homes in 2016 alone. 
The challenge posed by conflict and internal displacement is aggravated by the massive return of refugees and migrants from Pakistan and Iran. In 2016 alone, about 250 thousand undocumented migrants and 370 thousand registered refugees returned from Pakistan, and an additional 460 thousand undocumented migrants returned from Iran.6 
The estimates suggest that, on average for every security incident happening in a district more individuals are forced to move towards more peaceful areas, especially towards major cities of Afghanistan, thus directly affecting the wellbeing of those displaced peoples and causing poverty to increase. 
In parallel to poverty and conflict, unemployment is another major challenge for GoIRA; according to ALCS data, unemployment reached 22.6 percent in 2013-14, and underemployment rate was 16.4 percent means 39 percent of the labour force was not gainfully employed in 2013-14. 
The Poverty Analysis and Policy Committee (PAPC), which is consist of 7 line ministries namely Ministry of Economy (MoEc), Ministry of Finance (MoF), Ministry of Labour, Social Affairs, Martyred and Disables (MoLSAMD), Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestocks (MAIL), Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) and Central Statistics Organization (CSO) is currently working on poverty analysis and policy making towards alleviation of poverty in Afghanistan. GoIRA is committed to ending poverty and for that purpose has initiated multiple programs in different line ministries. 
The Afghan Citizen Charter Project is one of the major programs of the Afghan government which directly fights poverty at national level in the country. The development objective for the Citizensi Charter Afghanistan Project is to improve the delivery of core infrastructure and social services to participating communities through strengthened Community Development Councils (CDCs). These services are part of a minimum service standards package that the Government is committed to delivering to the citizens of Afghanistan. The overall budget allocated to this program is an amount of 2.1 billion dollars for 10 years. 
The commitment of the GoIRA in fighting poverty is strong and there are many effective programs in place to decrease poverty to a substantial level. The significant programs in poverty alleviation are listed as follows: 
* The National Skills Development Programme (NSDP) which has started by the MoLSAMD in 2004 and still continuing has been a good effort in giving formal and non- formal trainings in order to allow Afghan job seeker to find job easily. 
* The Safety Net and Social Protection (SNSP) is another programme led by MoLSAMD with the objective of providing safety nets and social protection to poor families, disables, martyr families, and also bringing reform in pension programs. 
* Support for Afghan Livelihood and Mobility (SALAM) is a programme helping internal displaced people and Afghan returnees from abroad. 
* Like the above mentioned programs there are many other major programs which target poverty at the national and sub-national level in the country. The Women Economic Empowerment National Priority Programme (WEENPP) is one of those major programs started on 8 March 2017 that will continue for 10 years with a cumulative budget of over $100 million. This program sees the contribution of 9 ministries and is led by MoLSAMD. 
Escaping the vicious cycle of poverty for afghan society will not be easy. Until peace is the major need of Afghanistan in order to fight poverty truly and confidently. 
Target 1.1: By 2030, eradicate extreme poverty for all people everywhere, currently measured as people living on less than $1.9 a day. 
The indicator proportions of population below the international poverty line defined as the percentage of the population living on less than $ 1.90 a day at 2011 international prices. Poverty is multidimensional and measurable from a variety of perspectives. The measurement of poverty in Afghanistan follows the Cost of Basic Needs approach (CBN). The official poverty line for Afghanistan was set in 2010 using the National risk and Vulnerability Assessment (NRVA) 2007-08 data and updated in 2011-12 to reflect price changes over time. The CBN poverty line indicates the monetary value consumption at which members of a household can be expected to meet food and non-food needs. Accordingly, the poverty headcount rate (poverty rate) indicates the share of the population whose consumption falls short of the poverty line.7 
However, the Afghanistan Living Condition Surveys of 2013-2014 (ALCS 2012-2014) is an outstanding piece of document for analyzing the status of poverty in Afghanistan. The ALCS 2013 -2014 reveals that poverty increased over time, with 39.1 percent of population living below the national poverty line. The period of 2011-2014 was characterized by a substantial downturned of economic growth that powered by political uncertainty.   
Target 1.2: By 2030, reduce at least by half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions according to national definition.  
This target indicates to reduce the percentage of population living under poverty in all its dimensions according to national definition of poverty line. According to ALCS 2011-12, 36.6% of the Afghans were living in poverty with 28.9% of urban, 37.3% of rural and 53.8% of Kochi population. The (PAPC) has been working on various policies and plans to reduce poverty in the country. The GoIRA is fully committed in reducing poverty in all its dimension and targeting poor and vulnerable people has been the main focus almost all the government project around the country. PAPC reviews all the development projects assures the projects targets the poor and benefits the vulnerable portion of the population. 
Target 1.3: Implement nationally appropriate social protection systems and measures for all, including floors, and by 2030 achieve substantial coverage of the poor and vulnerable. 
Despite progress over the past decade, increasing social protection for those most in need remains a priority. Globally, 18,000 children still die each day from poverty-related causes, and only 28 per cent of employed women effectively protected through contributory and non-contributory maternity cash benefits.20 Most poor people remain outside social protection systems, especially in low-income countries. Of the entire population, only 1 out of 5 receive any type of social protection in low-income countries, compared with 2 out of 3 in upper-middle-income countries. The coverage gap is particularly acute in sub-Saharan Africa and Southern Asia, where most of the worldis poorest people live. In sub-Saharan Africa, only 15 per cent of those in the bottom income quintile have access to a social protection benefit.8 
In Afghanistan the social protection floors or systems covered the vulnerable proportion of the population, which is divided into four sectors, (1) disabled (2) Martyred families (3) Pensioners (4) vulnerable families with children under the age of 10. At the moment, 110,037 disables are covered by social protection/safety net programs; 155,000 martyred families, 120,000 pensioners and 35,000 vulnerable families which has children under 10 years are covered by social protection and safety net programs in Afghanistan. The GoIRA has many programs which benefits the poor and vulnerable. The Safety Net and Social Protection (SNSP) directly targets poor by giving them pensions. The National Skills Development Program (NSDP) which has started in 2004 has a significant impact in helping unskilled labor which consists most of the poor population by giving them non-formal training for job access. 
Target 1.5: By 2030, build the resilience of the poor and those in vulnerable situations and reduce their exposure and vulnerability to climate-related extreme events and other economic, social and environmental shocks and disasters. 
For tracking this target, most countries established disaster loss databases used for managing and counting the losses of human from any natural disasters, however the many civil protection agencies and academic institutions used the information obtained from database for research bases. Afghanistan National Disaster Management Authority (ANDMA) upgraded to Ministry of Disaster Management and its key mandate is to oversight and manage all the natural disaster issues and provide basic services to vulnerable people affected by disasters.  
Number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000 people as of 2015 data is 23, 11 and 33 persons per 100,000 people respectively. 
The GoIRA in order to reduce the poor and vulnerable exposure to disaster and climaterelated extreme events has introduced key Government Ministries with important disaster response roles. These ministries include Ministries of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, Interior, Public Health, Refugee and Returnees, Urban Development, Agriculture, Irrigation and Water, Defense, Communications and Information, Economy, Finance, Transport and Public Works.  
Target a.1: Ensure significant mobilization of resources from a variety of sources, including through enhanced development cooperation, in order to provide adequate and predictable mean for developing countries, in particular least development programmes and policies to end poverty in all its dimensions. 
The Government of Islamic Republic of Afghanistan (GoIRA) has adopted a strategy to prioritize the development project in order to target the poor. The budget allocations of the development plans and projects is executed in a way to promote job creation, irrigation for better agricultural productions and to target the poor and most vulnerable Afghans around the country. As of the data provided by the ministry of Finance the amount of budget allocated directly to poverty reduction is a cumulative amount of $2.1 billion dollars which is divided in $200 million per year till 2030. 
The GoIRA initiated some development programs to target vulnerable areas and create more jobs for the citizens in the country. Those programs are citizen charter, jobs for peace, Saffron production and economic zones. The government will use on budget and off budget resources to implement these development programmes in order to eliminate extreme poverty.  
Education, health and social protections are the three main dimensions of the poverty. It is very essential and effective to invest in these three areas in order to reduce poverty. The GoIRAis major achievements during the last one and half decade has been in the education and health sectors. From overall national budget a well amount of the budget is allocated for these three sectors of the economy. In 2016, around 18% of the national budget is allocated in the above mentioned three sectors. 
 
Image Source: Behrouz Mehri/AFP/Getty Images 
 	 
Goal 2:  End Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved   Nutrition and Promote Sustainable Agriculture 
 
Not only is the agricultural sector key for food security in Afghanistan, but it is also a driving force for the economy, accounting for about one quarter of the national GDP, and it represents a major source of income for rural communities. The agriculture sector can not only contribute to revenue generation, but also to job creation, increasing labour productivity and womenis economic empowerment. Due to low production, one third (33%) of the Afghan population is food insecure (based on the calorie consumption) with an observed increase in urban food insecurity. The agricultural sector needs more attention in order to accelerate its growth and productivity. 
The impact of agriculture and the food systems on nutrition can be seen in the 
SDGs as well. The Global Nutrition Report (2016) estimates that 12 of the 17 SDGs have indicators that are directly linked to nutrition, with Goal 3 (good health and well- being) and Goal 5 (gender equality) having the largest number of such indicators, followed by Goal 2 (zero hunger) and Goal 1 (no poverty). 
Lack of access to sustainable income, stable availability and access to food have remained challenges for Afghanistan,24 with the majority of the people in Afghanistan facing caloric deficiency coupled with low quality of food. Life expectancy is low, infant under-five and maternal mortality are very high, and there is an extremely high prevalence of chronic malnutrition, poor sanitation, as well as a widespread occurrence of micronutrient deficiency diseases. The Nutrition Action Framework by the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) seeks to address these issues in a coordinated, multi-sectoral fashion, However, despite ad-hoc arrangements/project based approaches, the initiative is dormant due to resource and capacity constraints. 
GoIRA recognized the fundamental right to food in the 2003 Constitution;25 this further reaffirms Afghanistanis obligation to observe the United Nations Charter, inter-state agreements, as well as international treaties to which Afghanistan has joined, and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.9  
Afghanistan has made an obligation to reduce poverty by creating employment, and addressing the challenges of malnutrition, food insecurity, poor sanitation, low productivity and conflict.  Where specific and special efforts and attention as well as strategic reform approaches are required and considered in agriculture, infrastructure, rural and urban development and improved public services in the National Priority Programmes.10  
Under NCADPP, various targets were set for 2016-2020 to achieve its objectives. The targets were mostly compliance to the target set under National Priority Programs, which were reduced from 22 to 10, to deliver results and meet crucial agricultural priorities.  
With MAILis main vision being food safety, elimination of hunger and growing a balanced economy in the country, the Ministry has been seeking to align the SDGs with its activities. In particular, recognizing that poverty is a major challenge in Afghanistan, MAIL is focusing on SDG 2, , and specifically on targets 5,6 and 7 on building resilience for the poor; mobilizing resources to address poverty in all its forms and developing pro-poor policies that target gender and increase investment in providing opportunities to eradicate poverty. For this purpose, MAIL is developing an ambitious program that will enable women to be involved in food production, both at household level and on a commercial scale, contributing to improving food security under targets 3 and 4 of SDG 2. 
Tailoring the SDGs to national contexts involves a multi-stage process and the undertaking of in-depth systems analysis to prepare the foundations for creating policy coherence, identifying synergies and translating intermediate targets into national policy frameworks (including investment needs), the recognition of the interconnectedness of national, transnational, regional and global policy frameworks. The task of reviewing existing strategies and plans and identifying areas for change involves: 
(a) scanning and detailing the landscape of existing strategies and plans; and  (b) comparing existing goals and targets with the SDGs and targets defined. 
For Afghanistan, agriculture is the best means to generate capital and surplus through value chain improvement and exports. This is particularly true for horticulture, livestock and industrial crops. By acquiring certified seeds and saplings, the yield of farmers can be greatly enhanced. Improving irrigation conveyance systems including on farm water management, crop management and pest control can further contribute to greater efficiency and lower costs. Investing in better storage and reducing harvest loss including access to credit and a reliable transportation system (land and air) can result in accessing highend markets.  
In recent years, there has been a remarkable growth in the production of highvalue crops such as saffron, liquorice, pistachios, turmeric, pine nuts, ferula and an array of valuable medicinal crops. MAIL intends to provide technical assistance and financial support to marketing efforts in promoting medicinal and industrial crops.11 
The MAIL further intends to encourage horticulture. By adding an additional 360,000 ha of horticultural land, it is estimated that more than 360,000 full time equivalent (FTE) jobs will be generated by 2024. It is estimated that by 2024 the horticulture sector alone would contribute $3.23 billion compared to $1.4 billion in 2012. Similarly, in the livestock sector, it is expected that milk yield will increase to 1,200 litres/cow from the existing 400 litres/cow. Whilst the overall significance of expansion of livestock is primarily focused on providing interventions that address poverty alleviation and food security, it is projected to produce 604,000 new FTE and doubling poultry production resulting in contribution of a further $274 million to the National GDP. This includes increased opportunities for exporting national products to neighboring countries.12 
Target 2.1:  By 2030, end hunger and ensure access by all people, in particular the poor and people in vulnerable situations, including infants, to safe, nutritious and Sufficient food all year round. 
Percentage of individuals that have not access to safe, nutritious and sufficient food is 29% and the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock is supposed to reduce this figure with the close coordination and cooperation of the international community to 18% by the year 2030. 
 However, the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Public Health are working to improve access to diverse foods. Ministries of Public Health, Rural Development in collaboration with the Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs ensure sufficient and variety of nutritious foods to reach vulnerable families. The Ministry of Agriculture has made progress in the implementation of urban agriculture and the targeting of poor families and femaleheaded households to better diversify their income and allow them to access nutritious food. 
Target 2.3: By 2030, double the agricultural productivity and incomes of small-scale food producers, in particular women, indigenous peoples, family farmers, pastoralists and fishers, including through secure and equal access to land, other productive resources and inputs, knowledge, financial services, markets and opportunities for value addition and non-farm employment. 
Afghanistan with having 30 percent of suitable land for cultivation and adequate water capacity still included in the list of the countries importing wheat, rice and other food items. Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock of the country, by undertaking various programs such as adjusting the watershed managed to reach in achievements in that area. And based on the implementation plans and close coordination and cooperation of the international donors intend to increase the wheat production of 2.49 MT to 3.5 MT and 2.49MT to 3MT of rice production per hectare by the year 2030. 
Wheat is including basic and strategic plant of a country where the government and the Ministry of agriculture paid special attention to improving this product. Therefore, the Ministry of Agriculture and the resulting increase in its business priorities and strategy is an important part of this Ministry .To increase wheat production in the private sector for special attention and more than 100 companies support the production of improved seeds have been established. And this is the basic activities of the Ministry of agriculture, which always improved seeds to farmers across the country each year.  
Rice is the second basic strategic plant after wheat in our country and government has special attention to this sector. To increase wheat production with the private sector, more than 100 companies producing seed has been establish, Main activities of this has always improved seeds across the country each year to the farmers. Therefore, research on varieties resistant and productive in various zones of agriculture and the promotion and distribution of seeds among farmers in 34 province in the country.   
Ministry of Agriculture in order to improve the livelihood of women in all projects take care  the principle of gender equality policy  and employment for women specific activities such as poultry farming, distribution of cow and goat milk, food processing, creating groups insider, distribution of loans  and awareness of food security for women through projects such as National Horticulture and Livestock Project (NLHLP), Rural Microfinance and Livestock Support Program (RMLSP), Community Livestock and Agriculture Programme (CLAP), Perennial Horticulture Development Project (PHDP). 
The poultry sector is traditionally an important sector within the Directorate of Livestock Services of the Ministry of Agriculture has worked in different productive and proliferation farms around the country. This ministry  in terms of production of poultry shortages faced three main problems (NHLP, CARD-F, RMLSP) and  in the poultry sector with the support of the private sector and unions poultry their activities goes to the country after the production of poultry self-sufficient. There is many new farm has been created in this current year with the help of related sector that we would be pleased to implement it as soon as possible. 
  
Target 2.4: By 2030, ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices that increase productivity and production, that help maintain ecosystems, that strengthen capacity for adaptation to climate change, extreme weather, drought, flooding and other disasters and that progressively improve land and soil quality. 
Prevent soil erosion and improve productivity and increase production of food systems of the Country, which requires major programs, Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock of Afghan government with collaboration of international partners managed 7235 hectare of watershed with sustainable management systems of watershed managements and strives to increase this number to 116135 hectares in order to prevent soil degradation by the year 2030.  
Afghanistan as whole is a country of Watershed that we can divide Afghanistan into five major watersheds and these watersheds itself divided into small watershed that the government of Afghanistan does not use these watersheds properly and scientifically thereafter it could proceed many environmental problems such as soil erosion, landslides, floods and appalling, avalanches and not attracting and final resulting in financial losses. For overcome of the challenge set Watershed and restore vegetation and create a belt of greenery on one of the sound management Watershed, which this Ministry management expects to reach from 7235 hectares to 116,000 hectares in 2030. 
Much of the country's land is rain-fed and this cause a major part of agricultural production, especially wheat and other cereals in the same way that agriculture relies on rain water is obtained mainly located in the northern provinces of northern location that approximate total area of land in rain fed mature on 3,734,494 hectares, which equals 5.7% of the total area of the country that to increase agricultural production and to strengthen the economy of farmers and the entire economy is essential to the productivity obtained per hectare, and one of the factors in the rise resulting in Surely rain-fed land use practices and appropriate means of irrigation or auxiliary attachment for the Science and using modern technique of irrigation was possible to reach this goal. New methods of irrigation which is used for rain-fed land allows the use of solar pumps for irrigation in the form of drops, spray and other appropriate means, to save water and rain.  
Target 2.5: By 2020, maintain the genetic diversity of seeds, cultivated plants and farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species, including through soundly managed and diversified seed and plant banks at the national, regional and international levels, and ensure access to and fair and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the utilization of genetic resources and associated traditional knowledge, as internationally agreed. 
 
As Afghanistan faced chronic political instability and the war beside all destructions has caused loss of some of the species or are in vulnerable status. Revival and consolidation of all species that were endangered or changes have been brought in their generations requires significant responsive programs, Afghan government with the close coordination and cooperation of the international community has been able to identified 930 fruit and 64 species of field crops that are endangered and are protected and by undertaking conservative programs until 2030, 1000 species of fruits and 240 species of field crops will be included in conservative list.  
Characteristic of excellent fruits quality from Afghanistan has enjoyed an international reputation and also a good reputation in the global market. Various projects supported by the World Bank (NHLP) and of Europe (PHDP, ANHDO, ANNGO) in the development of horticulture sector and collection of national fruits and nuts in Afghanistan, including 849 types from 14 genders, and 6 research centers are available in the Ministry of Agriculture through the support of mentioned projects. Annually millions of seedlings tree hand up to the farmers with production and construction of thousands hectares of fruit garden in 34 provinces of our country. 
Community Nursery owner and gardeners have been established to support this project by the technical help of  Investigations Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture and genetic sources of fruits in the country are collected and identified for sustainable use of these resources by this office in the Ministry of Agriculture.  
Cereals, legumes, vegetables and crops in the terms of economic and food security has major role in the country. Ministry of Agriculture consider specific objective  to increase crops and total production of cereals (wheat, rice, corn), legumes ( Lentils, Peas, Beans) and oilseeds (flax, flaxseed, sesame, sunflower, cottonseed, olive) to support farmers at the national level. 
Therefore, field crops and vegetables by Investigation Directorate with the help of donors and other cooperation partners collected and identified, (Breeding Bank) has been established in the Ministry of Agriculture for the protection of these crops too.  
Target 2.A: Increase investment, including through enhanced international cooperation, in rural infrastructure, agricultural research and extension services, technology development and plant and livestock gene banks in order to enhance agricultural productive capacity in developing countries, in particular least developed countries. 
Afghanistan is an agricultural country and the majority of the Afghan economy relies on agricultural products and commodities, and about more than 80% of the population are involved directly and indirectly in the agriculture sector and considering the agricultural facilities both in terms of soil, climate and the different seasons Afghanistan is  one of the most important producers of agricultural products, now and in the future, And has a high potential for investment in this field, so therefore more budgets should be  allocated in the national budget  as it is felt The current situation is more than 5 percent and by the year 2030 increases to 11 percent. 
Research and extension are considered the two major elements of agriculture expansion and development, without these two factors, activities in this field doesnit result anything except waste of time and other resources, so this ministry has Realized the importance of the mentioned activities and trying to establish and develop the research institutions to increase the quality and quantity of agricultural productions in order to play its effective role. Therefore, it is necessary in the following sections, each: 
\0xEF In regard to vegetables, cereals crops especially wheat and rice seed production and import research and extension resources needed to be considered. 
\0xEF The soil analysis laboratories need to be equipped with qualified professionals.  
\0xEF Full consideration should be fouced in regard to seeds and sperms gen banks. 
\0xEF For establishement purpose of botanical gardens and cold storage facitilities required inputs should be achieved.  
\0xEF In all the above-mentioned areas professionals and capacity building is felt and to train the specialists Masteris and Doctorates are required.  
\0xEF Specific inputs are required for agricutural research and extension institutions in different zones and regions of the country For this purpose, the Ministry expects that the total capacity of 58 million US dollars should be increased to 110 million US dollars by the year 2030. 
As Afghanistan is an agricultural country requires huge investment in regard to agricultural research and extension. 

To encourage farmers to new technologies and rising agricultural and livestock productions various factors of production in the form of subsidies or long-term and shortterm loans to farmers is distributed, this approach result positive in terms of agriculture development and extension because most farmers are poor and have not had full access to factors of productions and machineries. 
Directorate of Agricultural Extension and Mechanization in the co-chairmanship of Cooperatives working to Implement it. The Ministry of Agriculture subsidies specific product such as Saffron, wheat and cotton production and so to a certain percentage conducted and non-specific public subsidies in supporting agriculture and livestock, such as the provision of agricultural equipment is intended and through direct and indirect applications of various projects. These Subsidies in the light of ministry obligation to world organizations such as WTO is taken into an account. 
Target 2.C   Adopt measures to ensure the proper functioning of food commodity markets and their derivatives and facilitate timely access to market information, including on food reserves, in order to help limit extreme food price volatility.  
As Afghanistan is a landlocked country and has weak market communication and information exchange system and farmers and producers of agricultural products do not have on time full access to rates and prices of agricultural products. The need is felt to go through the statistics of the Ministry in the area of prices and relative value in the market and agricultural markets within the country from 31 products should reach to 59 products by 2030 so that farmers, producers and other agricultural products consumers have accurate prices and relative market value easy access and competitive framework and market expansion and development to prepare. 
(a) Short Term Plan:  
However, the important programs planned for FY 2017-18 by MAIL is categorized into 8 sections, as following:  
* Procurement and distribution of wheat improved seeds and chemical fertilizers,   
* Establishing demonstration plots for saffron and cotton introducing new practices for saffron production,   
* Establishing and conservation of forests, postures and orchards, rehabilitation and conservation of natural resources management, watershed management  
* Establishing greenhouses,  
* Monitoring the construction activities of 5 modern slaughter houses,   
* Integrated Pest Management and weed control (IPM) in 34 provinces of the country,   
* Producing animal vaccines,  
* Establishing check dams,  
* Establishing kitchen gardens,   
* Constructing canals and irrigation networks/pipe schemes.   
* Capacity building and institutional reforms.    
 
(b) Long Term Plan:  
MAILis five-year plan focuses on seven strategic areas:  
* Irrigation: Restoration and rehabilitation of irrigation networks, the creation of more than 1334 at a total cost of about US $ 254 million to irrigate 250,000 hectares of land in 34 provinces;    
* Wheat and cereal production: Preparation and distribution of certified seed approximately 55,000 metric worth 56 million dollars in 34 provinces;  
* Expansion of gardening and industrial crops including horticulture: Expansion of saffron cultivation in 34 provinces to increase the production of 6 metric tons to 14 metric tons worth US $ 17 million; Expansion of horticultural area of 360 thousand hectares in 34 provinces with an increase of 30 thousand hectares worth 20 million dollars over 5 years; Construction of Raisins house from 1000 with an increase of 500 in need base provinces;  
Construction of green houses in 34 provinces from 7000 with the increase 2600; Construction of the kitchen gardening in 34 provinces increased from 77,980 to about 120,000; and Rehabilitation, reconstruction and equipping of mechanized stations in 34 provinces valued at $ 16 million;  
* Livestock: Development of livestock and agricultural research farms in the zones of the country worth $ 35 million; Control of different types of animal disease in 34 provinces worth $ 21; Development of livestock farms in 34 provinces worth $ 35 million;   
* Natural resource-based climate changes: Restoring, protecting forests, pastures, production of non-fruit saplings and establishment of green belt in 34 provinces worth 324 million dollars;  
* Food Security: Establishment of processing centres for agricultural products in the need base provinces worth $ 12 million; Establishment of modern slaughterhouse worth 31 million dollars in four provinces; Establishment of modern cold storages each with a capacity of 500 to 5000 metric tons with the total cost of $ 560 million in 34 provinces; Construction and reconstruction of the strategic reserves of wheat and silos at the country level worth $ 40 million; Control of plant diseases in 34 provinces with the cost of $ 10 million;   
* Institutional reform: Capacity building in the development of irrigation systems through establishment of irrigation associations and capacitate the staff of the sectorial departments, farmers, livestock holders at the country level with the cost of 10 million US dollars; Equipping and development of information technology systems worth $5 million; Equipping the GIS system and the development of agrometeorological system worth $2 million; Construction of extension units, establishment of provincial cooperative and the building of general directorate of research valued at US $ 25 million; and Create and equipping soil laboratories worth of $ 4 million.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  	 

Goal 3:  Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well-being for              All at the All Ages 
 
SDG 3 relates to healthy lives and well-being and is composed of 13 global targets and 26 global indicators. In the context of the nationalization of the SDGs, and considering the available data and achievability of the SDGsi targets and indicators, the Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), as leading entity for SDG 3, together with the Central Statistics Office (CSO) and MoEc, has identified 10 national targets and 17 national indicators, out of which four are to be finalized, for A-SDG 3.  
Many key health indicators improved more rapidly in Afghanistan than in most other countries that had started at a similar level of development.13 In particular, \0xECthe under-5 mortality rate dropped 60 percent from 137 per 1,000 live births in 2002 to 55 in 2016 whereas births attended by skilled health personnel increased to 58 percent from 14.3 percent over the same period. 
The number of functioning health facilities increased five-fold over while the proportion of facilities with female staff increased from 22 percent to 87 percent.15  However, challenges remain, especially with respect to malnutrition, maternal mortality ratio and high fertility rates, that would require adjustments to policies implemented to achieve sustainable development.    
Such indicators can be used to measure the progress made towards Afghanistanis achievements towards the MDGs, and further to the achievements towards the SDGs.  
Three of the eight MDGs directly related to the health sector (MFGs 4, 5 and 6)..   
(a) MDG 4: \0xECReduce Child Mortality.  
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), under-five mortality has declined from 181 in 1990 to 91 in 2015 per 1000 births. The main causes of deaths for the under-five were acute respiratory diseases (20%), diarrhea (14%), prematurity (13%) and (11%) intrapartum related complication (World Health Organization, 2016). However, there are huge reduction in the number of underfive mortality rate, it is still very high and also Afghanistan could not get the two thirds targets. Neonatal mortality rate is another main factor that has been diminished from 53 in 1990 to 36 in 2015.  
(b) MDG 5: \0xECImprove Maternal Health.  
Based on the data of DHS 2015, the maternal mortality is very high compare to the neighboring countries. MMR was above 1200 per 100,000 live births in 2015.. According to this report the main leading causes for maternal mortality ratio are postpartum hemorrhage, eclampsia and sepsis (World Health Organization, 2016). Under coverage of this goal is another target 5.B, \0xECachieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health services, which beside the maternal and child mortality rate reduction following services are improved and provided. Antenatal care, quality maternal, newborn and child health services, family planning services and contraceptive distribution have been provided; target evidence-based, costeffective and community training conducted to improve the managerial skills and ensure lifesaving medicines, commodities and equipment and ensure equitable distribution of human resources with community outreach (World Health Organization, 2016). 
(c) MDG 6: \0xECCombat HIV/AIDS, Malaria and Other Diseases, 
According to the WHO, the number of HIV positive or prevalence is low in Afghanistan. Most of the infected population are who inject drugs, which it is prevalence is 7%, however, 94% report using sterilized injecting kits. The prevalence of women sex workers is 0 and among guy is only 1%. The antiretroviral therapy is providing only for 200 women to prevent the transmission of the HIV from infected mother to child which 1%. Routine test of collected blood is done on 52% and the expected antiretroviral therapy coverage is for 3% (World Health Organization, 2016).  
Tuberculosis is the other infectious diseases that have approximate mortality rate of 43 people in 100,000. According to the WHO report, 31,622 cases of tuberculosis reported in 2013, of which 14,277 cases were new positive sputum cases. Success rate of treatment, in 2012, were 88%. Drug resistance cases is 3.7% among new cases, while it is 20% among previously treated cases. Tuberculosis is still major health problem despite availability of medicines and advanced diagnostic tools (World Health Organization, 2016).  
Malaria is considered the high burden and high risk for Afghanistan. From 2003 to 
2012, the total confirmed cases decreased by 85% from 360,940 to 54,840 cases.  
Afghanistan has been certified neglected tropical diseases free since 2007. However, cases of cutaneous and visceral leshmaniasis and blinding trachoma were reported: respectively, 33,894 and 24  in 2012.  
Coverage of immunization among one-year old has improved from 1990 to 2013 for BCG from 30% to 75%, DTP3 from 25% to 71%, Polio from 25 to 71% and Measles from 20% to 75%. Coverage of neonatal tetanus during the same period as also increased from 13% to 65%. Hepatitis B vaccine coverage was 71% in 2013.  
Contribution of non-communicable diseases burden has been rising and account for 36.6% all deaths; cardiovascular diseases account for 18.6%, cancer for 6.2%, respiratory diseases for 2.7% and diabetes mellitus 1.4% for all deaths. 31.7% of all deaths between ages 30 to 70 years are occurred due to one of the four abovementioned communicable diseases. More than 8.6% of young people aged 13 to 15 years (boy 8.7% and girl 8.8%) have ever smoked cigarettes, while passive smokers reported 23.7%. Consumption of alcohol per capita is 0.7 liter of pure alcohol. High blood pressure affects 22.5% of the population above 18 years old (22.8% male and 22.1 female), whereas, obesity affects 2.2% of the population (1.4% male and 3.0% female). From the 11 essential medicines for treatment of non-communicable, only eights are available in the public health sector (World Health Organization, 2016). 
According to the WHO report, prevalence annual rate of cannabis use is estimated at 4.3%, opiates 2.7%, cocaine 0.1%, and amphetamines 0.1% , and the estimated prevalence of substance use disorders among adults (15 years and over) is 0.9% for men and 0.1% for women (World Health Organization, 2016).  
Target 3.1: By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births. This target has two indicators, maternal mortality ratio and births attended by skilled health personal, accordingly.  
The maternity mortality ratio in Afghanistan is 1200 per 100,000 live births according to Afghanistan Demographic and Health Survey (ADHS 2015). 2015 Constitutes in this instance the baseline year, and by 2030, considering the future plans in the provision of health services, the MoPH has planned to bring it down it to 160. 
The percentage of live births occurred in presence of doctor, midwife or any skilled health personal with provision of health care services during a year currently stands at 51% according to the MoPH. By 2030, it planned to be increased to 79%. 
Target 3.2: By 2030 end preventable deaths of newborns and children under five years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under five mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births. 
The number of child deaths under five years of age per 1000 live births is 55 In 2015 based on MoPH data. By 2030 the MoPH, with the assistance of other stakeholders and thanks to past experiences is planning to decrease it to 20. 
Based on the given data from MoPH, the rate of the number of neonatal deaths in a specific year per 1000 live births in 2015 is 36 which is the baseline data. By 2030, the MoPH, with the assistance of other stakeholders and thanks to past experiences is planning to decrease it to 23. 
Target 3.3: by 2030, end the epidemics of AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and neglected tropical diseases and combat hepatitis, water-borne diseases and other communicable diseases.  
According to the given data from MoPH, the number of TB positive in 2017 is 143 per 100000, which is baseline. This number is supposed to increase until 2023, after which it will start decreasing into 10 per 100000 by 2030. 
The current number of malaria cases per 1000 persons in a year, is at a current rate of 11 people in 1000. This is accepted as a baseline. According to the MoPH this rate has been planned to decrease to 1 person in 2030. 
The number of new hepatitis B positive cases per 100,000 population is currently 4.5. This is the accepted baseline. According to MoPH, thanks to preventive planned precautions it will be decreased to 1 in 2030. 
Target 3.4: by 2030, reduce by one third premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote mental health and well-being. 
Unconditional probability of dying between the exact ages of 30 and 70 years from cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes or chronic respiratory diseases. According to the MoPH, the mentioned diseases contributed to 35% deaths in Afghanistan that accepted as a baseline, any by 2030, it will be decreased to 10% of deaths in Afghanistan. 
Target 3.5: Strengthen the prevention and treatment of substance abuse, including narcotic drug abuse and harmful use of alcohol in Afghanistan. 
Percentage of the drug abusers (People dependence to a stimulant, nevertheless of its side effects, having good effects on its mood and his/her affiliation is increasing by each time of use), who are provided treatment services. According to MoPH, 2.7% of these people are provided such services, which is the baseline and by 2030, it will be increased by 10%. 
Target 3.7: by 2030, ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health-care services, including for family planning, information and education, and the integration of reproductive health into national strategies and programs. 
Proportion of women of reproductive age (aged 15-49 years) who have their need for family planning satisfied with modern methods. 
According to the given data of MoPH, these services are provided to 20% of this category of people, which is the baseline. By 2030, the services will be provided to 45% of the population  
Number of adolescent birth rate aged 13 to 19 years per 1000 women, according to the given data of MoPH, is 12.1, which is baseline that by 2030, it is planned to decrease the number to 7.3. 
Target 3.8: Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all in Afghanistan. 
Access to basic and essential package of health services including family planning, reproductive health services (at least four times during the pregnancy), provision and implementation of vaccines and other health package services within two hours of walking or 10 km distance. According to the given data of MoPH, 88% of people have access to such services, which is the baseline, and by 2030, it will be increased to 97%.  
Percentage of the health sector services (budget) financed by international community. According to the data of MoPH, the dependency or budget financed by donors is 75%, which is the baseline and by 2030, it has been planned to decrease to 34%. 
Target 3.9: by 2030, substantially reduce the number of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water and soil pollution and contamination. 
Percentage of people who are having access to potable water or access of people to clean drinkable water in which do not cause any health problems. According to the MoPH, 65 % of all population have access to such water, which is the baseline and by 2030, it will be increased to 100%. 
Target 3.a: Strengthen the implementation of the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in all countries, as appropriate. 
According to the given data, 48% of males and 6 % females are tobacco users, which are the baselines, and by 2030, this figure will be decreased to a substantial level. 
Target 3.c: substantially increase health financing and the recruitment, development, training and retention of the health workforce in Afghanistan.  
Government contribution in funding of the health services provision that includes basic and essential health services. According to the given data, the government pay for 4.2 of total health expenditure which is the baseline and by 2030, it will be increased to 20 %. 
Number of health workers who providing the health services throughout the country. According to the data from MoPH, there are 24413 persons, which is the baseline and by 2030 it will be increased by 31710. 

Development presents an enormous opportunity to achieve gender equality, end poverty and hunger, combat inequalities within and among countries, build peaceful, just and inclusive societies, protect and promote human rights, and ensure the lasting protection of the planet and its natural resources. The SDGs provide an important framework for collective action to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls and the realization of their full enjoyment of all human rights. This work requires continued attention to the implementation of outcomes of major United Nations conferences and Summits, including the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, as well as the sustained implementation of international human rights treaties.38 
The social protection sector is one of the most important sectors in all the strategic documents of Afghanistan including ANDS and ANPDF. As SDG 5 focuses on gender values and equality, the Ministry of Womenis Affairs (MoWA) is leading the Afghan Social Protection Sector to achieve the values and targets of gender equality. MoWA has taken tenacious steps to improve womenis status, for the elimination of discrimination and violence against women, empowering women and supporting their human development in the promotion of womenis participation in education, economic, social and political processes via designing policies, pathways, strategies and recruiting them in the government administration and establishing provincial women departments. 
After the establishment of the transitional government and with the assistance of the international community since 2001, the new administration started working with the international community and the United Nations for enabling, supporting and promoting womenis empowerment in all around the country. The government has taken several steps to achieve all goals related to gender equality, ending discrimination and any kind of violence against women and girls. 
The National Action Plan for Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA) will be remembered as one of the major steps towards supporting women in the areas of social and economic empowerment. Implementation of NAPWA has resulted in urban and rural women having a better prospective to their future, for example is agriculture and handy craft productions. 
 
Preparing, finalizing, and lobbying for the first law in the history of Afghanistan that clearly describes more than 22 actions against women as crimes and orders the perpetrators of such action be punished has been a major achievement. This is especially considerable that there was no such legal document previously. The Law on Elimination of Violence against Women (EVAW) socially and legally supports women and encourages them to uphold their equal rights. Furthermore, MoWA, in coordination with international co-operators has conducted many programs and public awareness campaigns to publicize this piece of legislation and to get all men to understand and respect the equality of women. 
The A-SDGs intend to eliminate violence against women and develop and implement an appropriate legal and regulatory framework to remove such illegal actions. 
The elimination of all kinds of violence, traditions and customs against women and girls (i.e. child early marriage, forced marriage), the design and implementation of policies to further access into gender equality values, as well as women and girls empowerment and the participation in different parts of social life are included in SDG5. The e Ministry of Womenis Affairs (MoWA) is the leader in implementing and monitoring the related national plans.  
The London Agreement on 31 January 2006 reviewed and discussed Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS) and repeatedly emphasized to guarantee social gender equality and non-discrimination between men and women that is set in the constitution. Then, the National Action Plan for Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA) was improved to support three goals of ANDS including elimination of all kinds of discriminations against women, empowering womenis human capital and promoting womenis leadership.  
For the first time in the history of Afghanistan, women were the focus of a ten-year plan, prepared by MoWA together with international donors, that describes how to achieve three main goals including security, governance, rule of law and human rights. For implementation of NAPWA, six government sectors including security and protection, legal preservation and human rights, women leadership and participation, economy labor and poverty ending, health and education were made the initial responsible entities to implement and monitor from implementation.  
The Afghan government and MoWA has taken fundamental actions to secure and protect women, designing and proposing legal documents to eliminate violence against women and prevent of actions that socially resulted to women abuses, starting work on family law, critically reviewing budget entities based on gender equality values and supporting women related issues into such documents, cooperating with related entities to establish provincial attorney offices in all states and flotation of public awareness complains in all over the country to increase awareness on womenis rights and elimination of violence against women.  
Despite the numerous and remarkable achievements of the past years, findings of analytical reports on the monitoring of the implementation of the National Action Plan show that a number of governmental administration, due to various reasons, were not able to achieve some of the objectives mentioned in the Plan. The reason for this could be ineffective management and lack of capacity of MoWA as a new emerging entity. 
Nodaway, after many years of tireless efforts, the political participation of women in the government has reached significant levels, and women form 10% of people in managerial positions in the government. Despite these gains, women are still victims of discrimination and violation all over the country as in numerous instances the existing laws are not being duly implemented and the perpetrators of violence, harassment and discrimination against women are not brought to justice. 
Despite tangible developments, improvements and achievements, now, that several years have passed on implementation of National Action Plan, findings and analytical reports on monitoring implementation of the aforesaid plan show that a number of governmental administration due to various reasons were not able to achieve some objectives mentioned in the National Action Plan for improving women situation in terms of social protection, security, rights, education, health, economy and politics and the reason could be considered as weak management and incapacity of MoWA as a new emerging entity  assumption of the National Action Plan as a property of this Ministry and flagging commitment of other governmental administrations regarding implementation of this plan.  
Now, after many years, political participation of women in the government is inconsiderable, women in managerial positions in the government form 10 percent, they are still victims of discrimination and violation all over the country and even law is not being implemented on perpetrators of violence, harassment and discrimination against women. Forced marriages of children and obscene traditions have horrific impacts on womenis social protection.  
 
Target 5.1: To eliminate all kinds of discrimination against Women and Girls in the Country. 
This targets aims to eliminate violence in all its forms everywhere. The indicators measures whether or not national laws promoting equality between men and women and eliminating violence against women and girls exist in the country. In addition to that, this indicator emphasizes the existence of practical mechanisms and frameworks for monitoring and implementation of policies and regulation on the elimination of violence against women and the promotion of equality between men and women in the community. This indicator considers established establishing legal frameworks in Afghanistan in comparison with other countries.  
Target 5.2: Elimination of all kinds of violence against women and girls in public and private places, for example human trafficking, sexual abuse, and other kinds of inappropriate behaviors. 
Forms of violence can be defined as follows:    
Physical violence:  Include many forms to inflict physical harm upon victim of violence such as: coercion, hair-pulling, slapping, punching, kicking, choking, biting, burning or attempting to assault with weapon or knife. 
Sexual violence: Means any type of harmful sexual act imposed on a person. 
Emotional violence: Include acts such as emotional abuse, controlling actions or status of a person, which normally occurs along with physical and sexual violence. 
This indicator shows the percentage of women and girls aged 15 to 49 who were subjected to physical, sexual and psychological violence by their spouse during the last 12 months. It is worth mentioning that this percentage includes women and girls who have been interviewed and surveyed by Afghanistan Demographic Health Survey (ADHS). 
This indicator shows percentage of women and girls aged 15 to 49 who were harassed and subjected to violence by people other than their spouse. It is worth mentioning that the percentage includes women and girls who have been interviewed and surveyed by ADHS. According to Ministry of Women Affairs data 56% of women ever partnered girls and women aged 15 or more have experienced at least one from of violence during last 12 months by their husband or fianc\0xC8. While women aged 15 or more has experienced violence by people other than their partner is lesser at 53%. The GoIRA is fully committed to reduce this ratio to under 40% by the end of 2030. 
Target 3.5: Elimination of any kinds of harmful practices such as: child, forced and early marriages. 
Proportion of women aged 20-24 years who were married or in a union before age 15 and before age 18 is according to results of the survey carried out by ADHS that percentage of women aged 15 to 19 married reaches to 17% while male married in the same ages reaches to 3%. This percentage indicates that more women are married in earlier ages than men. It is worth mentioning that the percentage includes women and girls who were interviewed and surveyed by ADHS. It is also mentionable that there are no reliable figures now to show number or percentage of women who are married under legal ages. The planned target for this indicator in Afghanistan is 10% which going to be achieved by 2030. 
Target 5.4: Recognize and value unpaid care and domestic work through the provision of public services, infrastructure and social protection policies and the promotion of shared responsibility within the household and the family as nationally appropriate. 
This target is about achieving and realizing values of the unpaid work women do at home and for the family. Most of the women in Afghanistan work as housewives at home, they also have significant contribution in agriculture fields in rural areas; raising poultry products and dairy products, but never get paid. 
In Afghanistan the proportion of unpaid domestic workers as a proportion of workforce, is 28%. This ratio differs largely between male and female workers where, for male workers the ratio is 17% and for female workers this reaches 73% of their population. It has been targeted by the MoLSAMD to reduce this percentage to 15% by the end of 2030 
Target 5.5: To assure inclusive and effective participation and also equal leadership opportunities at all levels of political, economic and public life decision making. 
This target aims at enhancing role and participation of women in decision making and assuring equal leadership opportunities for both men and women. It is worth mentioning that the number of seats reserved for women has been specified in the Constitution of Afghanistan. In Afghanistan the proportion of seat held by women in parliament and local governments is 23% which higher than the worldis average of 21%. As such, while the number of women in the decision-making bodies of the Government has improved significantly in the last one and half decade. While women didnit have the right to work during the Taliban regime now they constitute 10.7% of managerial position in government. This trend will improve to 32% by the end of 2030.  
This indicator shows comparison of women who are working in managerial positions in governmental offices against men in the managerial positions. Managerial positions start from the 3rd grade to above grades, ministries, deputy ministeris offices and general directorates. 
Planed MoWAis activities:  
* Provision of Legal Protection; 
* To strengthen a Fund that aims at funding the medical treatment to be provided to the victims of severe violence; 
* To Support and Provide Economic Services for Women; 
* To Support and Provide Healthcare Services for Women; 
* To Support and Provide Educational Services for  Women;  
* To Support and Advocate Improved Presence of Women at Managerial Levels; 
* To Train Governmental Employees about Gender; 
* To Raise Public Awareness regarding Gender Equality; 
* To strengthen the gender statistics committee for collecting statistics of  gender equality; 
* To reactivate and strengthen non-governmental coordination committee for implementing national action plan of women;   
* To reactivate and strengthen the Multiple Consultative Committee of gender equality (GMTF);     
* To monitor the implementation of national action plan for women of Afghanistan and policies in governmental institutions; 
* To review policies and strategies of governmental institutions programs and present the reform draft of laws from the prospective of gender; 
* To perform research for drafting policies and programs; 
* To attract the financial and technical support of international community and donor institutions for implementing women programs. 
 	 

and international markets. The development of transport corridors has been affected by the conflict. Poor designs (often done using Google maps) and weak contractor management have been equally challenging, resulting in very high costs for poor quality construction. To avoid these issues in the future, we will commence a process of establishment of pre-qualifying certified firms to build roads. Work is underway to improve transportation authorities by establishing systems that would allow them to harmonize responses to the countryis expanding transport needs. This includes the establishment of a Road Authority, a Road Fund, and a Transport Institute. 
Afghanistan has launched a long-term program for electricity generation and transmission. Projects such as CASA-1000 and the Turkmenistan 500 KV power line could eventually carry up to 4000 MW of power. The TAPI natural gas pipeline is making progress toward delivering gas from Turkmenistan to South Asia. The inauguration of the Salma multipurpose dam is a major achievement and could provide revenue from transmission sales and increase the availability of commercial and private electricity in Afghanistan.14  
Domestic power generation is on the rise, with a master plan to produce 2,300 MW from internal sources within five years, including four large hydroelectric projects developed as public-private partnerships (PPPs) and 600MW from solar, wind, and natural gas, also through PPPs. By the end of 2018, Afghanistan will be generating more electricity from new domestic sources than has been produced domestically during the previous 40 years. Priority will be to continue to invest in the national grid, which is a fundamental prerequisite for commercial or industrial development, while making increasing investments in renewables for residential and isolated areas. 
With Afghanistanis recent accession to the World Trade Organization, significant opportunities present themselves to allow the country to meet international standards and develop new competitive practices that would attract greater investments from other member states in addition to contributing to the achievement of the SDGs. 
Over the past decades, regions such as East and South Asia have made remarkable progress in achieving development goals in the areas of infrastructure, industrialization and innovation. However, achieving Goal 9 by 2030 will require addressing a range of resource constraints, especially for the least developed countries (LDCs), Landlocked Least Developing Countries (LLDCs) and Small Island Developing States (SIDS). Countries will have to strengthen their capabilities and explore new ways to solve development challenges by involving various actors, processes and types of governance, source of finance and encourage collaboration and cooperation across stakeholders, sectors and regions. 
Sustainable Development Goal 9 includes three different objectives, namely; building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization and fostering innovation. The goal has five broad Targets that are considered as goals themselves rather than targets. For better measurement of the Targets, the A- SDGs introduced localized indicators. The three dimensions of the Goal are interrelated and might affect each otheris performance. 
Sustainable infrastructures contribute to economic and human development including achieving industrialization and fostering innovation. Afghanistanis future economic performance and social development depends on access to affordable and sustainable energy, irrigation infrastructure, sustainable roads, and technological knowhow and competent institutions. 
The Goal 9 includes three different objectives, namely; building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization and fostering innovation. The goal has five broad Targets that are considered as goals themselves rather than targets. For better measurement of the Targets, the ASDGs introduces localized indicators. The three dimensions of the Goal are interrelated and might affect each otheris performance.  
Sustainable infrastructures contribute to economic and human development including achieving industrialization and fostering innovation.  Afghanistanis future economic performance and social development is viewed to depend on access to affordable and sustainable energy, irrigation infrastructure, sustainable roads, technological knowhow and competence institutions.  
Target 9.1: Develop quality, reliable, sustainable and resilient infrastructure, including regional and trans-border infrastructure, to support economic development and human well-being, with a focus on affordable and equitable access for all. 
It does not indicate what kind of infrastructure it refers to, but it seems that it focuses mainly on roads, mobile broadband subscriptions and ICT maturity. The target itself lacks comprehensive indicators able to convey the full picture of the status of the infrastructures condition in a country. Afghanistan has added more indicators for sectors and will add more if required, such as indicators on railway, aviation lines, power grids and so forth. 
Infrastructure building is one of the main priorities of the government of Afghanistan. We are putting our efforts to convert Afghanistan in to a land-linked country linking south Asia to central Asia. Huge investments have been allocated to construction and reconstruction of highways, water dams, irrigations systems and so forth.  
Target 9.2:  Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and, by 2030, significantly raise industryis share of employment and gross domestic product. 
Many years of conflict and war left the country in ruins. During that period, the various countryis economic sectors suffered a lot. Industry and state owned enterprises were totally destroyed. The establishment of the new administration paved the ground for industry and other sectors to operate.The recent investments on buildings roads and energy production will definitely impact the cost of production in the country. This would be a good incentive for domestic and foreign investors to invest and manufacture in Afghanistan. 
However, the industrial sector has to tackle with different problems such as lack of infrastructure, technical knowhow, energy provision and so forth. The share of the industrial sector as contribution to the GDP stood around 19 percent as of 2016, which indicates a decreasing trend from previous years.  
Afghanistanis industry is mainly based on agriculture and pastoral raw materials. The sectoris performance is thus often connected with the performance in the agricultural sector. Afghanistanis industry supplies food stuffs and beverages, processed dry fruits, plastics, skins and so forth. There are also mineral, precious stones, gas and oil that have remained largely unexploited. 
The manufacturing value added as proportion of GDP is 12% as of 2015 (World Bank, 
2015) and might have further decreased, as the value was measured around 18% in 2002. The share of value added by industrial processes is expected to be substituted by the services sector in the future. 
Unemployment has increased during the recent years. The foreign troopsi withdrawal had a significant impact on the investment climate. The decline in total investments, especially in the manufacturing sector, might have contributed to unemployment. The employment in manufacturing sector is currently estimated to be around 11%. 
Target 9.3: Increase the access of small-scale industrial and other enterprises to financial services. 
Providing access to credit and financial services has been a significant challenge during the past years. The presence of high interest rates (16-20%) and guarantee has exacerbated the problem. The total credit provided during the year 2015 is estimated around 685 million USD. The figure is expected to increase in the coming years. 
The country, as several least-developed countries, counts more small scale- industries than medium scale ones. It is also worth mentioning that there are still firms that are not registered and operate in a financial gray area. This has toughened the ability of the Government to gather and disseminate accurate statistics on small scale industries.  The Central Bank of Afghanistan is working on a mechanism and scheme to ease credit access by small and medium firms.  
Target 9.4: By 2030, upgrade infrastructure and retrofit industries to make them sustainable, with increased resource-use efficiency. 
Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in building infrastructure. The government strategy is to improve infrastructure investment efficiency. The ongoing conflict and corruption are considered major constraints to this end. The governmentis and donor agenciesi investments in infrastructure projects have been increasing recently. Infrastructure investment    in   the   Governmentis    2016   development   budget,  as   per   the NIP; sector coverage, was $1273 million and accounted for approximately 50 percent of the total development budget.15 
Target 9.5: Enhance scientific research, upgrade the technological capabilities of industrial sectors including, by 2030. 
There is no specific budget and fund allocated for this purpose, however there have been some outspread efforts by different institutions. The government is determined to highly invest in R&D in the coming years. The research and development expenditure as proportion of GDP is 0.3% as of 2015. 
Furthermore, some new research centers and institutes have been established in Kabul recently. The main research areas of the newly established institutes include social, political and security issues. Afghanistan Academy of Sciences is the only public research center that needs revitalization. 
Building resilient infrastructure and promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization:  
* Encourage private sector infrastructure development;  
* Where possible, provide cleared government-owned land to accelerate strategically important infrastructure;  
* Consolidate design and adopt innovative procurement to reduce tender and completion times;  
* Train a cadre of infrastructure engineers and project managers;  
* Increase domestic generation to 2,300 MW, using natural gas, renewable energy, and hydro-electricity;  
* Develop domestic energy supplies and transmission, especially through renewables; and   
* Normalize the pricing and subsidy regime. 
 	 

Goal 17:  
 
Goal 17 insists on countries partnership in various areas, to successfully implement the sustainable development goals, strong commitment and partnership between governments, private sector and civil society needs to be established.  
Based on Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF), which has been presented to the international communities in Brusselsi Conference on Afghanistan, the GoIRA believes in the globally agreed principles for Aid Effectiveness, ownership, alignment, harmonization, managing for results and mutual accountability, but the government and its partners have been lax on both sides of the mutual accountability compact. Donors can play an extremely constructive role in advancing the Self Reliance agenda by helping policy get on the right track, reversing current problems caused by fragmentation, and using funding assistance to drive better performance and accountability.16  
Afghanistanis reform agenda rests on the government ability to use a consolidated budget as the primary instrument for carrying out policy. Our international partners have increasingly been testing the waters to assess the realism of using budget-based support to channel their aid. Channeling donor funds through the national budget is not only a more efficient, cost-effective use of money than off-budget programming is, but supporting the Afghan budget process is a necessary step towards a successful donor exit strategy.  
The efficiency of both on and off budget investments needs to be improved. Complex procurement, poor budgeting practices, and weak contract management lead to lengthy delays and unnecessary cost increases. The government needs a more structured project review system for its on-budget projects to weed out projects that lack precision. We will also provide more efficient, problem-solving support for partner projects that create jobs and contribute to our development, beginning with streamlined approvals and simpler procedures for licensing. Improving security for large construction projects is also a priority.  
But the biggest potential for using funds efficiently is to use national systems wherever possible. Using government systems not only reduces unit costs but is an essential pre-condition for the government to take full responsibility for performance. Furthermore, given the security situation, off-budget programs face increasing challenges to providing adequate site supervision, a problem that could be solved by increasing the use of pay-for-results on-budget financing. Principles, values and common vision should be the base for the comprehensive partnership. The partnership should be establishing in International, national and local level. supporting the developing countries and specially the least developed countries and developing islands should be the base for all forms of development.  
Goal 17 is key for Afghanistan, because this is an international framework and it studies all aspects of sustainable development and aims to reduce poverty and social progress. Decades of war and neglecting development brought Afghanistan to the poor condition and this was a major obstacle facing the economic development of Afghanistan. After liberation from the Taliban, in last one and a half decade, Afghanistan experienced significant coordination and help of international community.  
Development, to start with, is the process of making use of all the resources available to a nation and country to bring lasting improvements to the lives of its people and citizens and bring about better standards of living for all of them. Naturally, it involves economic growth and rising incomes as a result of making use of the natural resources available within a country and this is possible by the help of international community for example the process of bidding and handing over the Aynak copper mine in Logar.  
Likewise, bidding and selection of the extracting company for the Hajigak iron mine in Bamyan marked a significant step towards transparency and accountability, required for sustainable development and growth in Afghanistan. 
Despite significant advances in development, much effort will be needed to meet the economic and social needs. Compared to the surrounding countries, Afghanistan has the highest amount of untouched natural resources that could represent a tremendous contribution towards sustainable development. 
For Afghanistan this is the challenge that brings our efforts on all the other 16 goals together. To reach internally and internationally for goal 17 an ambitious and interconnected global development agenda requires a new global partnership. This includes financing development, connecting people through information technology networks, international trade flows, and strengthening data collection and analysis. Even as the world comes together to unite for global development. 
In 2014, official development assistance stood at USD 135.2 billion which was the highest level ever recorded, only seven countries have so far met the UN target of providing official development assistance to the tune of 0.7% of their gross national income. While people around the world come closer together through physical and digital networks, more than four billion people do not use the Internet, and 90% of them are from the developing world. The gender gap in internet use reaches up to 29% in the least developed countries. 
The implementation of development projects within the framework of national priorities and an increase in the level of budget spend and investment has helped boost Afghanistanis economic growth rate and sustainable development. Developed countries to implement fully their official development assistance including the commitment by the international partnership in sustainable development procedure in Afghanistan. 
Implementation of the plans and targets sets related to the goal 17 and close assistance with other budget entities of the government needs deep commitment of international counterparts. With mapping the new plan for SDGs the Afghan government has planned to implement the A-SDGs agenda until 2030. 
Afghanistan has pledged for the implementation of strong cooperation mechanisms, both domestic and international, to enhance the global partnership for sustainable development, complemented by multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to support the achievement of the sustainable development goals in Afghanistan and all countries.  
The GoIRA is an important part of SDG 17 17 and it has been strengthened by the countryis efforts to build networks within the region and with the world. Afghanistan has membership in regional cooperation and institution like South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, Economic Cooperation Organization, as well as with UN agencies and programmes around the world. For this important issue government of Afghanistan encourage and promote effective public, public-private and civil society partnerships for building the experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships 
In 2016 Domestic revenue in Afghanistan was 1.95, considering the Afghanistan national peace and development framework, Afghan government is committed to increase the domestics revenue by 12.659 Billion in 2030.  
Afghanistan made pledge for strong cooperation internally and internationally to enhance the global partnership for sustainable development, complemented by multi-stakeholder partnerships that mobilise and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources, to support the achievement of the sustainable development goals in Afghanistan and all countries.  
The Government of Afghanistan is an important part of this new global partnership goal 17 and it has been strengthened by the countryis efforts to build networks within the region and with the world. Afghanistan has membership in regional cooperation and institution like South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, Economic Cooperation Organisation, as well as with UN agencies and programmes around the world. For this important issue government of Afghanistan encourage and promote effective public, public-private and civil society partnerships for building the experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships. 
Going forward, we will work closely with our international partners to use aid as effectively as possible.  Our strategy for achieving this concentrates on the following steps:17  
* Commitment by donors to pool resources behind this strategy, particularly support for the medium term expenditure framework;  
* Agreement on the pre-conditions for expanding on-budget support, either directly or through the ARTF;  
* Improve dialogue and review procedures to ensure alignment of all financing with government priorities and regarding quality of preparation;  
* Increased use of reimbursement for delivered results and the successful implementation of strategic reforms; and   
* Strengthened mechanisms for audit and accountability.  
Despite considerable progress over the past 15 years, Afghanistanis donor partners have raised reasonable concerns over the fiduciary integrity of our financial management systems. The following measures, proposed for 2017-19, would go a long way to increase trust levels and provide credible evidence of improvement:   
* Implement the national anti-corruption action plan and legal framework;  
* Pass laws criminalizing corruption in line with the UN Convention Against Corruption;  
* Expand public disclosure of asset declarations to cover law enforcement, customs, and tax administration;  
* Expand the use of electronic payments and e-procurement to line ministries;   
* Strengthen the Supreme Audit Office; and  
* Update Afghanistanis Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability 
(PEFA) rating, which is an internationally recognized instrument for assessing fiduciary risk.  	 

Data Availability 

Generating accurate data is a challenging task in Afghanistan. The difficulties in data collection are due to lack of technical capacity, inadequate resources and insecure environment. As coordinator of the A-SDGs, MoEc endeavors to liaise with the Central Statistics Organization and line ministries to address these issues in order to improve the flow and accuracy of data. Thus the data incorporated into the first draft of the A-SDGs national document demonstrated both accomplishment and limitation. 
Centralized Coordinating and Reporting Body for the SDGs 

The Ministry of Economy is the central coordination body for the SDG program as well as for monitoring and evaluating the SDGs implementation. All GoIRA budget entities have been instructed to report their SDG efforts to the MoEc which will then critically analyze the data and prepare standard progress reports annually and semi-annually for the High Council of Ministers, the Cabinet and the UN.   
Thematic Analysis 

Based on the MoWA Strategic Plan and Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework (ANPDF) all socio-economic development programs related to supporting women are in progress. There are many national programs and projects funded by the government or development partners to support different thematic areas, such as partnership between the Afghan government and United States Agency for International Development (PROMOTE), Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF), European 
Commissionis Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Department (ECHO), Department for International Development (DFID), Human Rights and Democracy Fund (HRDF), Common Humanitarian Fund (CHF), Project grants to over 80 CSOs; thematic areas: Anti-corruption, humanitarian aid and women empowerment (ACBAR) and many other poverty reduction programs such as citizen charter, jobs for peace, national solidarity programs (NSP), national skills development programs (NSDP), women chamber of commerce and many more. These supporting and development priority programs are focusing on different thematic areas such as poverty reductions, food security, empowering women, quality education, quality health services, strengthening partnerships with national and international stakeholders.  
Beside the mentioned programs, government has new initiatives that support ensuring good governance, gender equality, fighting narcotics and corruption, eliminate any kind of violence against women and children in the country.  
 	 
Means of Implementation 

During the last year GoIRA has realized its ownership of the SDG program. The SDG Secretariat can say that the Government and the Afghan people have endorsed the strategy as \0xECone nation, one voice. The 2030 Agenda is now considered as the foundation strategy for the socio-economic development of Afghanistan and all available resources will be used to attain the SDG targets.  
The diversity of outreach and implementation tools and their effectiveness will reassure the international partners of Afghanistan of the effectiveness of its SDGs program.  
Data, Monitoring and Accountability  

Reliable data will be vital for monitoring successes and setbacks in the implementation of the SDGs. A priority of the government institutions will be to generate accurate and reliable data for the preliminary task of setting baselines for nationalized indicators. Accurate data requires statistical surveys and research by experts, good security, and adequate financial resources. There is a need to improve collection, analysis and dissemination of high quality, reliable and timely data. Capacity, security and funding are therefore the primary challenges for Afghanistanis SDGs programme. GoIRA established a joint technical working group:  
* Government of Afghanistan foresees the establishment of the A-SDGs Coordination Councils and Committees involving the government agencies, private sector, civil society orgs, academia, media, NGOs, Gender entities.  
* The A-SDGs national review process will be achieved through monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework for national strategies and annual action plans.   
* Data collection & national statistical system will be the cornerstone for A-SDGs national monitoring and evaluation  
Monitoring and Reporting Mechanisms 

Afghanistan is a donor dependent country and will require significant additional funding commitments from its international development partners to finance SDGs implementation. The current trend, however, is that donor funding for Afghanistan is diminishing after a decade of generous support. GoIRA will require specialized capacity building programs to learn from the SDG experiences and best practices of other countries. Setting realistic baselines for the national targets and indicators will require professional technical assistance of developed countries in addition to increased funding. Alignment and integration of the SDGs targets and indicators with GoIRA development plans and policies of the budget entities will require the full support of the international community. 
The central monitoring and reporting system (CMRS) will be able to automatically generate different kinds of tailormade and flash reports with clear and appropriate graphical representation and visualization. The system will also be able to import from and export data to excel formats. This will enable the responsible staff of General Directorate of Policy and RBM to generate yearly or ad hoc country narrative reports on SDGs progress by conducting different kinds of data analyses. In the central repository system, the tabulated data on SDGs indicators, and reports with graphical representation should be accessed ministry/organization wise, sector wise, goals and target wise and all SDGs indicators etc. by the authorized persons and citizens. 
Monitoring and reporting mechanisms are essential for effective and accountable governance and must be integrated into implementation mechanisms for the sustainable development goals (SDGs) from an early stage. Efforts to track progress towards national goals and targets need to be integrated in the existing institutional set-up and capacities. The UN Global Guidelines on SDGs monitoring (being prepared) are also to be referred to.  
From the institutional perspective of MoEc, General Directorate of Policy and Result Based Monitoring (GDP&RBM) is mandated to plan, coordinate, and monitor the A-SDGs implementation. In order to ensure that A-SDGs monitoring, review and reporting mechanisms, the GDP&RBM is going to establish and operationalize SDGs monitoring system together with SDGs data repository and web-based data system. In doing so the existing result based M&E system and MDG data repository within the MoEc will be fully utilized. 
A special data analysis mechanism has been designed and implemented for the nationalization of targets and indicators. All government budget entities and stakeholder technical committees were assigned by the High Council of Ministers to critically review the targets and indicators, and to adjust them to the national context and development priorities.  
All government institutions have further been informed by the High Council of Ministers that it is mandatory for each of them to engage with the A-SDGs development agenda in terms of applicable targets and indicators within their respective spheres of responsibility. Additionally, they are to report the process of that engagement to MoEc as the lead and coordinating institution of the A-SDGs. MoEc will then analyze that data and incorporate the sectoral assessments into periodic reports to be presented to the High Council of Ministers and the Cabinet, and through diplomatic channels, to the UN.  
The key features of the Monitoring and Reporting System or mechanism will be: 
* Online Knowledge Management Platform;  
* Focus on open access to Afghanistan SDGs data and knowledge;  
* Supports more dynamic, interactive assessment and reporting process;  
* Provide range of analytical and mapping, search and visualization tools;  
* Web intelligence portal;  
* Easy flow of data;   
* Generate reports;   
* Create inter-agency coordination;   
* Generate knowledge on achievement of sustainable development goals, targets and the relevant indicators;    
* Ensure effective dissemination of information through elaborative, succinct and clear graphical representation. 
Each indicator of SDGs targets will be automatically rated by using the following simple criteria:  
 
Monitoring of A-SDGs Indicators Progress
 
Sector
Agriculture and Rural Development
Reporting  
Ministry
Ministry of Agriculture
Reporting Period
2017
G.3 
Ensure health lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
T 3.1
By 2030, reduce the global maternal mortality ratio to less than 70 per 100,000 live births
 
Sr. No
Indicator
Status
Baseline
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
 
 ?
 
T 3.1.1
Maternal deaths per 100,000 live births
Planned
20
25
30
35
40
45



Actual

23
25
36
40
44



% of Achievement

92%
83%
103%
100%
98%
T 3.2  
By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age, with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as 12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per 1,000 live births 

Sr. No
Indicator
Status
Baseline
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
 
 ?
T 3.2.1
Under-5 mortality rate (deaths per 1,000 live births)
Planned
20
25
30
35
40
45



Actual

23
25
36
40
44



% of Achievement

92%
83%
103%
100%
98%
 
 	 
Statistical Annex 

The Ministry of Economy developed an official website for the A-SDGs and a Database along with a mobile application for easy access to the information. Each goal has been broken down into targets and indicators and for each target and indicators the Government has set its own programs and plans. In cooperation with CSO, for each indicator, a qualitative and quantitative baseline has been set, and the achievements will be reported annually. 
The database has been designed and will be selected as the basis for the analysis and reporting, since the comparisonis express purpose is to position Afghanistanis development with respect to other developing countries. Additionally, in general the statistical work of the MoEc can be considered reliable and the impact of the information it collects as significant. 
Finance Development Assistance Matters 

Afghanistan is a donor dependent country; 95% of its development budget is donor funded. Given the challenges involved, successful implementation of the SDGs will hinge on finding new and innovative approaches for mobilizing both public and private resources. Securing greater access to untapped domestic resources will increase ownership and accountability, and reduce dependency on aid and on volatile international markets. Financial transparency is a key issue. 
The thematic area of 2017 is poverty eradication. The national commitment to the A- SDGs program serves as an incentive for the Government and its international partners to initiate more programs and channel more funds to implement national development targets and reduce poverty in the country. 
Technology 

There are many opportunities to use technology innovation in areas such as health, energy, agriculture and waste treatment to help achieve the successful implementation of several SDGs. Afghanistan proposes to its international partners to assist the A-SDGs programme by transferring technological innovation in different sectors and to develop programs to help Afghanistan to shift from traditional management methods to more modern methods based on new technologies.  
The A-SDGs Secretariat at MoEc has conducted many technical workshops for different stakeholders and academic institutions. GoIRA can improve its efforts for socio-economic sustainable development by a more systematic review of the SDGs efforts of other developing nations by using their relevant technologies.  
 
Major Global Challenges 

Four major global challenges need to be addressed for achieving the SDGs. 
1. Cost 
Some of the SDGs have had a cost estimate analysis, which show that the required budget will be enormous. For example, rough calculations have put the total global cost of providing a social safety net to eradicate extreme poverty at about $66 billion a year. The annual investment required to improve infrastructure (water, agriculture, transport and power) could total $7 trillion globally. 
A major conference on financing the SDGs, held in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa in July 2015, failed to ease concerns that there will not be enough funds to meet the aspirational nature of the goals. It included a recommitment to the UN target on aid spending at 0.7% of gross national income (GNI) set more than 40 years ago. Multilateral banks committed $400 bln. 
2. Peace 
Maintaining peace is essential for development. Threats to international peace and stability by non-state actors are emerging as a major factor for both developed and developing countries. The conflict and peace crises in Afghanistan and Syria have forced millions of people to leave their homes as refugees. 
3. Measurement Challenges  
So many targets and indicators will clearly cause operational and measurability problems for developing nations. 
4. Accountability 
There was a lack of accountability for MDGs at all levels. This challenge needs to be addressed in SDGs. At the international level, most developed countries have not met the target of allocating 0.7% of GNI to international aid in the last 40 years. The lack of priority in funds allocation within country budgets was also a problem during the MDG program. Similar lack of accountability exists at ministry, state and local administration levels. If the SDG program is to be taken seriously, accountability needs to be strengthened at all levels. 
 
 
 
 
National Challenges 

* Due to its donor dependent economy, implementing the SDGs program for Afghanistan will require strong commitment of development partners to fund the SDGs program; 
* Conducting self-assessment and needs assessment with regards to SDG targets and indicators will require significant technical capacities that do not exist in GoIRA; 
* Realistic and accurate data for setting baselines and annual targets for indicators does not exist in Afghanistan. There are weak technical capacities and a deficit of relevant experience in sectoral agencies to set baselines and annual targets for the indicators. Establishing and implementing the process for defining baselines and targets will require an enormous effort. The high number of indicators and the need for baseline surveys to be conducted by experts will require plenty of time, a secure environment, and a huge amount of funding; 
* Achieving the SDG program in Afghanistan will be challenging. Addressing each target opens the door to a range of complex factors; 
* For example, a primary SDG is to alleviate hunger. The fundamental cause of hunger in Afghanistan is long-term internal conflict and instability. Development is correctly linked with peace and stability in the Afghanistan National Peace and Development Framework. This fact restrains Afghanistan from effectively addressing hunger as an SDG. How Afghanistan can achieve peace remains a challenge, given the current political situation; 
* Climate change will negatively affect Afghanistan from achieving sustainable agriculture. Its water sources are entirely dependent on climate. The question is whether or not Afghanistan has the human and financial capacity to avert the negative impacts of climate change, particularly if those measures have cross borders implications; 
* There is no doubt that ongoing programs and prospective SDG projects will contribute to food and nutrition security, and to create sustainable food systems. How these programs can be more streamlined for greater results requires consideration of wider factors beyond a set of focused targets; 
* Fragmentation of smallholders is a constraint to sustainable agriculture in Afghanistan, as well as the high cost of production, food safety and food insecurity. 
How this situation could be improved will be a challenge to the SDG methodology; 
* The consensus prediction for the economic growth rate of Afghanistan in the near future is two to three percent. This low rate will negatively affect Afghanistanis overall economy. Again, the complex issues that are involved in economic growth rates are beyond the scope of focused SDG targets and indicators; 
* The high rate of illiteracy in Afghanistan contributes to malnutrition, poor food utilization, and poor agriculture practice, which will negatively impact SDG implementation.  
* In summary, the SDGs program will focus attention, resources and effort on a series of targets and indicators. Progress can be achieved in certain sectors, but sustainable solutions for highly complex and problematical situations in least developed countries such as Afghanistan will be difficult to achieve; 
* Unemployment, low income, limited sustainable agricultural opportunities, harsh climates closing districts during the winter cause extreme poverty in the country; 
* Government, donors, international agencies are only interested to work in safe and accessible districts n leaving vulnerable areas to their own solutions; 
* There is no proper capacity building of the personnel responsible for growth monitoring and screening, and no good recording and reporting; 
* Limited information for planning, monitoring and controlling for communicable disease; 
 
 	 
Recommendations: 

* Afghanistan is a donor dependent country and will require significant additional funding commitments from its international development partners to finance SDGs implementation. The current trend, however, is that donor funding for Afghanistan is diminishing after a decade of generous support; 
* GoIRA will require specialized capacity building programs to learn from the SDGs experiences and best practices of other countries. Setting realistic baselines for the national targets and indicators will require professional technical assistance of developed countries in addition to increased funding; 
* Alignment and integration of the SDGs targets and indicators with GoIRA development plans and policies of the budget entities will require full support of the international community; 
* Improvement of rural infrastructure, including rural roads going to more productive areas and rural electrification (solar power, biogas, hydropower, wind energy and geothermal) in order to create industries, factories and SMEs is required; 
* The Public Private Partnership (PPP) should be encouraged to create enabling environment for credits and markets. The government is urged to protect and encourage the private sector participation in order to attain food self-sufficiency; 
* Capacity building of the Strategic Grain Reserve (SGR) mechanism to increase stability of food supplies and food access in the country during seasonal shortages and acute shortages in emergencies is needed; 
* Increase number of refrigerated trucks and cold storage facilities to reduce high prevalence of post-harvest losses will improve food storage and preservation; 
* Bring down the cost of milling-which is high in Afghanistan compared to neighbouring countries, notably Pakistan through encouraging greater private investment in more modern and efficient milling plants; 
* However, greater coordination within a national planning framework is needed, to build on the investments already made and to collaborate more effectively with the private sector; 
* Improve access to land by the poor, implementation of the National Land Policy approved in 2007, align related land laws, and proper regulatory frameworks is essential; 
* Government should give priority for investments to areas with greater security and where poppy cultivation can be more effectively controlled; 
* Invest in procuring wheat grain rather than wheat flour and prevent illegal entry of wheat flour into the country; 
* Invest in food production planning, food safety, certification and adjusting products to markets requirements; 
* Invest in enabling environment for food processing, provision of electricity, land, access to finance and elimination of corruption; 
* Afghanistan should develop a resource mobilization strategy to secure sustainable funding for the national nutrition scale up plan; and must continue to mobilize resources to invest in food security and nutrition specific programmes along with an allocation of government funds. A better mechanism to monitor the resources and the implementation processes is needed; 
* Harmonize National Food Security, Household Food Security and Nutrition Security through an integrated approach. Moving forward with AFSeN is becoming urgent because it has clearly it has spelt out the roles and responsibilities of Afghanistan government and non-government stakeholders; 
* Strengthen the role of women in agriculture, livestock and horticultural production and productivity through specific training, extension and support schemes such as poultry farming and fruits and vegetable gardening; 
 
 	 
Conclusion 
The 2030 Agenda requires vigorous and professional mechanisms for follow-up and tracking the progress with implementation. While we believe that the global targets and indicators proposed by the experts are very ambitious and visionary for most of the fragile and least developed countries. Nationalization process defined the global targets and indicators in accordance with the local circumstances we face. The development of a high-quality indicator framework is work that will need to continue over time.  
Mainstreaming the SDGs in national policies, plans and strategies will be crucial for success. Furthermore, if we succeed in integrating the three dimensions of sustainable development in a balanced manner, this will highlight the relevance of the Agenda at both national and international levels.  
The important contributions made by Afghanistani development partners reflect their commitment to the Agenda. Civil society organizations, representatives from the business community and the scientific and academic communities are clearly speaking with one voice: We need to increase the focus on eliminating poverty, reducing pollution, improving governance, increasing investments in education and stimulating profitable capital investments. This will involve multi-stakeholder consultations to define key intended outcomes. In order to maintain a high level of popular engagement, Afghanistan will continue to promote informed debates and information sharing on available platforms.     
The topic of the 2017 High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, \0xEBEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a Changing Worldi, resonates well with the Afghan domestic and international policy agenda to support and protect vulnerable and marginalized groups. Afghanistan will give special priority to efforts to ensure that girls and women, people with disabilities, young people, ethnic minorities and people affected by conflict and crisis are enjoying well-being and not suffering from extreme poverty.  
Afghanistan is entering a new era. The shock of transition is giving way to a visionary and forward-looking strategy for self-reliance. This agenda focuses on a reformed development architecture anchored in a budget process that demands discipline, focus, realism, and a pragmatic approach to solving problems.  
Success lies in striking the right balance between advancing reforms and reducing development assistance. Development partners reassessing their assistance to Afghanistan must be careful. Afghanistan is a country at war. Conflict not only imposes enormous costs on the country but also carries the risks that additional shocks will plunge the country back into chaos. While we are confident that Afghanistan will succeed, the risks of failure are all too real. Too sharp a cut in levels of aid will stoke further unrest and violence. Afghanistanis longstanding conflicts are not of its own making; there is a shared obligation to see the transition through in a responsible way.  
Over the past year, we laid the foundations that will make this framework succeed. The reforms to our security forces are slowly reducing citizen insecurity and our countryis vulnerability to attacks. As we re-assert and sustain control over the whole of the national territory, the process of rebuilding can begin. Our people must have confidence that their government can give them better life chances than a return to insurgency will, that their children will be healthy and educated, that they can trust in the law. They must have faith that their government will be able to match its promises with real actions that inspire hope and improve their lives. The A-SDGs may not solve all the problems we are facing today. But it does provide the means for our leaders to guide our march towards self-reliance. 
Next Steps of Implementation 