Part I - Introduction
1. INTRODUCTION 
Jordan has made significant achievements over the past decades, witnessing economic, social, human and political transformations encompassing all areas of life. These developments have translated into tangible improvements in education and health, and the availability of comprehensive quality infrastructure and services covering transportation, electricity, communications, water supply security and municipal services. The economic growth rates during the first decade of the millennium reached about 6.5%, translating into decent work opportunities and improved living standards for all citizens.
The country lies at the centre of one of the most volatile regions in the world.  A highly modernized country with a rich culture and heritage, Jordan continues to undertake bold structural and political reforms and strengthen the role of the private sector to promote its economic growth.  Jordan accomplishes this while remaining resilient in the face of great emerging challenges, and building upon such challenges in an effort to turn them into opportunities.
The country is approaching demographic transition, with a growing population of educated and ambitious young men and women, who are considered the most valuable asset for the countryis present and future prosperity.
Jordan has been historically accustomed to sudden influxes of population fleeing conflict from neighbouring countries and seeking safety and security within Jordanis borders. The country has opened its borders to Palestinians, Iraqis and others in need many times in the recent past. Since 2011, the kingdom has been called upon again to accept the stream of Syrian refugees fleeing the violence in their homeland. Overall, the number of registered refugees with UNRWA and UNHCR has reached 2.8 million, making Jordan the largest refugee-hosting country worldwide, when compared to the size of its Jordanian population.
During the past decade, the country has also faced a number of other challenges. Most notably, these have included: the 2008 global financial crisis and the rise in oil and food prices, generalized instability throughout the region and the spill over effects on investment, trade and tourism, and finally, the tremendous impact of the Syria crisis and resulting population growth, which have impacted upon overall development gains in Jordan. 
According to the 2015 census, Jordanis population stands at 9.5 million. Approximately 30% of the population are non-Jordanians and more than 1.3 million are Syrians, with around 89% of Syrian refugees living in host communities, mostly in the capital Amman, and in the northern governorates. Such circumstances put increased pressure on Jordanis limited resources, especially water resources, and impose severe stress upon its public services, including health, education, energy, infrastructure, municipal services, and solid waste management. 
Part I - Introduction
Jordanis population 9.523 million

Figure 1: Jordanis population per governorate as per the 2015 census.
The crisis also affected economic growth, trade, exports, tourism and investment, in turn leading to an increase in the budget deficit and public debt. The annual direct cost of hosting Syrian refugees in the kingdom amounts to approximately USD 2 billion while the annual indirect costs are estimated to be USD 3.1-3.4 billion.  
Jordan was one of the first countries globally, and in the Arab Region, to take action towards the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Overall, considerable achievements were made during the first ten years, especially in the areas of poverty eradication, maternal and child health, communicable diseases, universal primary education, and environmental sustainability. Abject poverty was reduced from 6.6% to less than 0.5%. The infant mortality rate was reduced from 34 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 17 per 1,000 live births in 2012 while the under-five mortality rate was reduced from 37 per 1,000 live births to 21 per 1,000 live births over the same period. Maternal mortality rates were significantly lowered from 48 per 100,000 live births in 1992 to 19 per 100,000 live births in 2008. Universal primary education was achieved for boys and girls alike in 2005. 
Part I - Introduction
Key challenges identified in the 2015 National MDG report confirm the need to address: high unemployment rates especially among women and youth, limited economic and political participation of women, raising mortalities due to non-communicable diseases and increased water shortages.
Jordan was actively engaged in the global consultation as the MDG timeframe was coming to an end. The consultations in Jordan fed into a number of international processes and reports that have shaped the Post-2015 sustainable development agenda. Most notable among these was the Global Report by the UN Development Group (UNDG): \0xECA Million Voices: The World We Want, launched by the UN Secretary General in September, 2013. 
More than 2,500 participants took part in these consultations in Jordan while more than 10,000 people participated virtually, through social media networks. In addition, over 50,000 Jordanians voted on the global priorities through the \0xECOur World Survey. The four main areas that emerged as critical for Jordanians in the upcoming period include:
1. Strengthening the link between education and the labour market, and supporting entrepreneurship to reduce unemployment and ensure decent work;
2. Combating stereotypes to achieve gender equality and decrease geographical disparities; reducing poverty and ensuring equal access to social services;
3. Enhancing accountability, respecting human rights and contributing to regional stability;
4. Enhancing awareness on environmental issues, promoting renewable energy and  	 	 addressing water scarcity.
In light of these priorities, Jordan set out to realize the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, building on the lessons learnt in achieving the MDGs. A Roadmap for Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) implementation has been developed, mainstreaming the SDGs into national/sub-national planning, budgetary and monitoring frameworks and institutional mechanisms put in place to secure the coordination of SDG realization. Jordan readily adopted the 2030 Agenda and the accompanying SDGs, renewing its commitment to the Universal Declaration for Human Rights, and the outcomes and declarations of all conferences and summits convened by the UN, including: the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the Programme of Action of the International Conference on Population and Development, the Beijing Platform for Action, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and, more recently, the UNis Third International Conference on Financing for Development, held in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia as well as the Paris Climate Change Summit.     
These commitments come within a challenging landscape and increased population pressures which continue to put severe strains on Jordanis limited resources.  Jordan has been coping with the repercussions of the Syria crisis and regional instabilities and conflicts with support from the international community, in recognition of the global public good that the country has been providing. Yet, the protracted crisis in Syria and throughout the wider region, entering its seventh year, represents a serious threat to national resilience and impacts negatively if not disrupts Jordanis ability as a host country to achieve SDGs.   
Despite the numerous challenges Jordan is currently facing, the country has embarked on implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and achieving the SDGs. Jordan remains determined to safeguard recent development achievements while ensuring a more resilient, prosperous and inclusive economy going forward and as per the Roadmap laid out in the opening statement above.



Part 2 - Voluntary National Review Preparation
2. VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW PREPARATION: 
A PARTICIPATORY PROCESS
Jordan is committed to the 2030 Agenda and to leaving no one behind. The Government of Jordan has opted to prepare its first Voluntary National Review (VNR) and present it at the High Level Political Forum during the July 2017 session. Central to this decision was the desire to benefit from the national deliberations, and not solely from the report produced. In addition, through its participation, Jordan aspires to further strengthen national ownership of the 2030 Agenda, build a proactive momentum around it, and accelerate its realization.  
The process of preparing the voluntary review was led by the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation (MOPIC), as the focal point for SDG implementation, with support from the United Nations Country Team in Jordan, including non-resident and regional agencies. The Higher National Committee on Sustainable Development provided overall strategic guidance and supervision.  
To construct the VNR report on solid grounds, the same guiding principles adopted to strengthen ownership of the SDGs were employed, as demonstrated in the figure below:
 

Figure 2: Guiding principles in strengthening SDG ownership and preparation of the VNR
The Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation prepared a stakeholder engagement strategy to ensure the widest participation from all MGOs in the SDG implementation and VNR preparation. The 
Part 2 - Voluntary National Review Preparation
strategy proposes a variety of fora including taskforce meetings, workshops, focus groups and debates as well as a number of outreach tools like printed materials, social media engagement, and others. 
The stakeholder engagement strategy also took into account challenges to the meaningful participation of all MGOs, namely: difficulties reaching the most marginalized, the tendency to involve larger NonGovernmental Organizations (NGOs) rather than smaller, community based organizations (CBOs) and individuals and time constraints.
Between March and May of 2017, extensive consultations on the way forward were held with line ministries and MGOs using a variety of approaches. Examples of these are: meetings and workshops with civil society organizations, including organizations working on human rights, womenis rights, and community development; engaging Volunteer Involving Organizations (VIOs) and those working with youth, the private sector, workersi unions, local councils and committees, academia, and science and technology communities. Special attention was paid to ensuring the inclusion of women, youth, children and people with disabilities. Representatives of Syrian and other refugee communities were also included and actively participated in the consultations.
The main objective of the debates was to ensure that MGOs were involved in the review and in defining the way forward in achieving the SDGs, building on existing frameworks and structures. More specifically, the consultations aimed to:
\0xEF Raise participantsi awareness surrounding the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, its   	goals, targets, indicators and their linkages with national priorities and plans;
\0xEF Inform the participants of actions taken to date by the Government to mainstream the Agenda  	and SDGs within national plans;
\0xEF Review related national priorities and monitoring mechanisms, including the use of the VNR in  	the process;
\0xEF Discuss the role of various MGOs in implementing and monitoring the Agenda and achieving  	the SDGs;
\0xEF Suggest coordination and communication mechanisms between the Government and various  	MGOs to ensure true ownership and genuine partnerships in achieving the sustainable  	development agenda.
All discussions highlighted the importance of robust partnership building in realizing the SDGs as this responsibility does not rest solely on the Government. They also identified and confirmed a number of priorities and issues to inform the way forward. Strengthening coordination at all levels, the importance of public-private partnerships, engaging both the elected municipal councils and governorate councils (scheduled for August 2017); creating enabling environment for the meaningful engagement of the private sector, civil society and academia in the 2030 Agenda and its monitoring across the country, and the need to harness technology in addressing SDG challenges in Jordan. The urgency for action on gender equality, youth and womenis social and economic empowerment, was also underscored.
In order to ensure the widest participation from Government and other MGOs in the thematic discussion for the year \0xECEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a Changing World, a number of meetings and individual discussions were held with experts, government officials, MGOs and working groups formed for this purpose. Concise position papers were later drafted by government officials and experts on selected areas related to Jordanis priorities and reflected within the report. 





3. Mainstreaming the SDGs into national development plans and planning frameworks, thus ensuring their priority implementation;
4. Mainstreaming within sub-national plans or at the governorate level (localizing), starting with two governorates on a pilot basis, and then gradually reaching all governorates;  
5. Strengthening national statistical systems and availability of data through the categorization of SDG indicators into Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III indicators1, provision of technical and financial support to the Department of Statistics (DOS) and other institutions to disaggregate data, and improve data availability and quality; 
6. Gender mainstreaming through mapping the SDGs (especially SDG5) with the current and future EDPs and national strategies, in addition to identifying disaggregated indicators needed to monitor progress;
7. Further strengthening of institutional mechanisms, building on the policy structures and frameworks already in place for \0xECJordan 2025 and EDP coordination and implementation; 
8. SDG Costing through providing relevant econometric models;
9. Financing through internal and external sources. In this regard, MOPIC, in coordination with the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and the General Budget Department, has linked capital expenditures to the EDP, thereby also ensuring that priority funding is allocated to the SDGs as an integral component of the EDP;
10. Enhancing monitoring and evaluation systems. MOPIC, in cooperation with the Performance Progress Unit at the Prime Ministry, is in the process of developing a national monitoring system which will be used to monitor national programmes and plans. The outputs of the monitoring system will include regular progress reports and a monitoring dashboard on the Ministryis website;
11. Capacity development and provision of technical support in all areas related to the 2030 Agenda, including mainstreaming of SDGs, targets and indicators at the national and sub-national levels and monitoring and evaluation. 
The Roadmap represents an important building block for the 2030 Agendais implementation and will be regularly reviewed and refined as part of the overall monitoring of national development plans and mechanisms. Several line ministries have formed technical working groups to review their sectoral plans and map them against the SDGs. Technical missions have also been conducted to support this process with relevant line ministries and the DOS, especially with regard to assessing the availability of indicators and identifying their categorization.
NGOs and CSOs have been heavily engaged in strengthening ownership of the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs following its adoption. Many awareness raising workshops and consultations were held around different themes to discuss their role in implementation and monitoring. As an example, these included many youth forums, meetings of NGO coalitions and VIOs, and the science and technology community.   
   
Tier 1: Indicator conceptually clear, established methodology and standards available and data regularly produced by countries;
Tier 2: Indicator conceptually clear, established methodology and standards available but data are not regularly produced;
Tier 3: Indicator for which there are no established methodology and standards or methodology/standards are being developed/tested
3.2. INCORPORATING THE SDGS IN NATIONAL FRAMEWORKS
Jordan has focused on ensuring that its development system, policy environment and institutional framework are conducive to commence the realization of the 2030 Agenda on solid grounds, building upon achievements and successful mechanisms in place during MDG timeframe. The following documents represent the major frameworks to achieve the SDGs in Jordan:
\0xEF 	 Jordan 2025: A National Vision and Strategy
There is a widespread belief in Jordan that implementation is the task of the government alone... However, successful reforms require the commitment of all stakeholders - private sector, civil society and individual citizens - to do their part.    
 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	   Jordan Vision 2025
\0xECJordan 2025 is a blueprint developed at the same time as the Post-2015 consultations with wide participation from all MGOs and was launched in the first half of 2015 in the presence of His Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn Al Hussein.
This national vision and strategy document was developed following the conclusion of the National Agenda for the years 2006-2015. It is a thorough, 10-year socio-economic blueprint for the country that takes into consideration the social, economic and environmental dimensions of sustainable development, with the objective of achieving a prosperous, resilient and inclusive economy while strengthening reforms.
\0xECJordan 2025 puts the Jordanian citizen at the centre of the development process within the country, where a prosperous and resilient Jordan depends on the wellbeing of active citizens who have a strong sense of belonging, live in a safe and stable society, with a dynamic and globally competitive private sector, served and supported by an efficient and effective government. 
The document articulates the future envisioned for Jordan in the coming ten years, and outlines the general framework that should govern the economic, social, environmental and cultural policies of the country. Its basic principles include promoting rule of law and equal opportunities, increasing participatory decision making, achieving fiscal sustainability and strengthening institutions.
This, according to \0xECJordan 2025, requires improving infrastructure, enhancing education and health services, achieving water and energy security, enhancing economic growth and decent work opportunities (especially for youth and women), ensuring balanced local development, while strengthening the role of the private sector and civil society organizations. 
\0xECJordan 2025 also highlights the committed involvement of the countryis citizens, government, private sector and civil society as key active partners in sustainable development and in safe-guarding the environment.


 
\0xEF 	 Executive Development Programmes 
The Executive Development Programmes (EDPs) are multi-year government development plans, developed through a participatory approach, to integrate and track different national development and sectoral plans and strategies under the \0xECJordan 2025 and include also development programmes for each governorate as part of the countryis  decentralization drive, based on a participatory bottom-up consultative approach, to address the needs and regional disparities among governorates, based on their competitive features, whilst targeting poverty and unemployment challenges as well as putting in place investment maps for each region based on competitive advantages. EDPs translate also the \0xECJordan 2025 document into actionable and measurable development programmes through three or four year cycles. The first EDP for 2016-2019 is currently under implementation. The Programme was designed in partnership with all MGOs as essential partners in the development process, with the support of a coordination committee and 18 task forces, with representation from relevant public and private sector establishments, CSOs, academia, women and youth representatives. The EDP covers 26 development sectors, and identifies the roles of 123 partners (public, private, CSOs, others) in carrying out 2,126 projects. The EDP places great emphasis upon the role of the private sector in implementing infrastructure and service-related projects and focuses on the importance of developing an enabling legislative environment. 
A monitoring and evaluation mechanism has been put in place for the EDP, with more than 600 indicators designed to be tracked by MOPIC through three-month progress reports and annual analytical reports. Both the \0xECJordan 2025 and the EDP are in harmony with the SDGs inscribed in the 2030 Agenda.
The SDGs and targets of the 2030 Agenda have been mainstreamed to a great extent throughout the EDP; a large percentage of the SDG indicators, categorized at Tier I indicators, are among the 600 indicators that monitor progress of the EDP. Jordan is committed to ensuring that the coming EDPs will include all Tier I indicators and a growing number of Tier II and Tier III indicators as this data becomes more regularly available or methodologies for their calculation are established within national statistical mechanisms. 
The following figure illustrates how the SDGs, their targets, and indicators link with the EDP and its indicators.

Figure 5: Intersections between the goals, targets, and indicators of the 2030 Agenda and the EDP
\0xEF Governorate Development Programmes 
Governorate development programmes have been prepared for each of the 12 governorates, translating national priorities at the sub-national level and taking into consideration their own priorities and challenges in line with their governorateis comparative advantages and unique development situation and challenges. All governorate development programmes share the objective of enhancing socioeconomic growth in the governorate without harming the environment and with the aim of minimizing the gap between governorates and regions. All programmes also share objectives related to community empowerment, reducing poverty and unemployment, and strengthening local economies through government interventions, investment projects, self-employment initiatives, small and medium-sized enterprises and pilot projects. It is expected that these programmes will support the decentralization project and also the elected local councils throughout the governorates to mainstream the SDGs within their development plans. Outputs of these governorate development programmes are integrated as part of national EDPs.
\0xEF The Jordan Response Plan for the Syria Crisis (2017-2019) 
The Jordan Response Plan for the Syria Crisis (JRP) is a pioneering resilience-based rolling plan that brings together medium-term humanitarian and resilience efforts in a single, national framework for the benefit of both refugees and host communities. The JRP was developed within the overall framework of the \0xECJordan 2025 document to ensure its harmonization with the long-term development priorities of the country and is in line with the EDP and the governorate development programmes to ensure complementarity and avoid duplication. The plan seeks to meet the humanitarian needs of Syrian refugees both in camps and hosted within Jordanian host communities and of the Jordanian hosting population impacted by the crisis, while striving to foster the resilience and effectiveness of Jordanis service delivery system in the areas of education, energy, environment, health, justice, municipal services, social protection, water and sanitation. The JRP also outlines treasury costs incurred by the Government for hosting refugees and continuing to provide public services to them. The JRP will also endeavour to mitigate the impact of the crisis on the environment, the labour market and livelihood systems, shelter, transport and energy provision. The JRP is developed and updated on a rolling basis based on comprehensive vulnerability assessments and by involving Government, donors, UN agencies and key NGOs involved in humanitarian efforts. The JRP framework provides the development planning compliment to the national EDP, and jointly they provide an integrated development framework for Jordan that outlines development needs and interventions for Jordanians and those for refugees, in both camps and within host communities in addition to incremental development needs and interventions for host communities impacted by hosting Syrian refugees as well as costs incurred by national treasury to continue providing public services to refugees.
\0xEF The Economic Growth Plan (2018-2022) 
This plan was developed to recapture the countryis economic growth momentum and realize its development potential. It includes economic, financial and sector-specific policies, as well as government interventions with a focus on partnership with the private sector. This is accomplished through a range of projects and investment opportunities that will stimulate growth in different sectors. The plan also sets the growth rates across the different sectors for the next five years, to be translated into employment opportunities, well-being and the livelihood of the Jordanian citizen. Outputs of its detailed action plan are being integrated and will be updated and tracked through successive EDPs. 
\0xEF Other National Plans and Strategies 
Important national strategies and plans have also been finalized, putting in place a strong policy environment for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. These include, but are not limited to: 
\0xEF The Comprehensive National Plan for Human Rights (2016-2025) 
\0xEF The National Strategy for Human Resources Development (2016-2025)
\0xEF The National Strategy for People with Disabilities 
\0xEF The National Strategy for Women (2013-2017) with a new one for (2018-2022) under development
\0xEF The Jordanian National Action Plan to Implement UN Security Council Resolution 1325 (2017-2020), under finalization
\0xEF The National Strategy for Youth Empowerment (2017-2025), under development 
\0xEF The National Climate Change Policy (2013-2020) 
\0xEF The National Strategy and Action Plan for Sustainable Consumption and Production (2016-2025) 
\0xEF The National Policy and Strategy for Science, Technology and Innovation (2013-2017) 
\0xEF The National Plan for Green Growth
\0xEF The National Plan for the Elderly (2016-2020)
\0xEF The Demographic Dividend Policy Document
\0xEF National Employment Strategy (2011-2020)
\0xEF National Social Protection and Poverty Eradication Strategy (2018-2025), under development
\0xEF National Plan for Green Growth (2017-2025)
\0xEF National Solid Waste Management Strategy (2015-2034)
\0xEF National Water Strategy (2016-2025)
\0xEF National Energy Strategy (2015-2025) 
\0xEF National Integrity Executive Action Plan  (2014-2018) 
\0xEF Digitizing Jordan (2018-2020) for E-Citizen & E-Business services and Reach 2025 strategy to digitize the economy   
3.3. INSTITUTIONAL COORDINATION MECHANISMS
In order to ensure efficient alignment, and to emphasize a commitment to all SDGs within national priorities, the Government has opted to ensure that no overlapping mechanisms are established anew and that the implementation of the 2030 Agenda builds upon existing institutional frameworks. These have been further refined to allow for better harmonization.  The following chart illustrates the institutional mechanisms adopted to solidly anchor the 2030 Agenda and clarifies the relationship between its various settings. 

The Higher Steering Committee is headed by the Prime Minister and includes relevant Ministers (and when required, all the cabinet/council of ministers), the private sector and CSOs. The committee endorses long-term plans such as \0xECJordan 2025 and operational plans based on this lasting vision, including the EDPs. 
The National Higher Committee for Sustainable Development was established in 2002, following the announcement of the MDGs, and designed to act as a reference for all national endeavours related to sustainable development. The committee is headed by the Minister of Planning and International Cooperation with membership from relevant line ministries, the private sector, CSOs, and representatives of women, youth, Senate (upper house), House of Representatives (lower house), and local communities. 
The Membership of the National Higher Committee for Sustainable Development was expanded in March 2017 to include broader Government and civil society participation, with the view to ensure better alignment with the 2030 Agenda, underscore the importance of civil society participation in policy making, and bring policymakers closer to the needs of the most vulnerable. The committee provides guidance and follows up on all decisions, priorities and recommendations related to the 2030 Agenda. Its terms of reference include:
\0xEF Contribute to identifying national priorities that are in line with socio-economic development,  	without harming natural resources and the environment;
\0xEF Ensure the mainstreaming of the 2030 Agenda within national and sectoral strategies and plans;
\0xEF Supervise the preparation of progress reports related to sustainable development;
\0xEF Endorse national executive plans;
\0xEF Endorse frameworks proposed by sub-committees to strengthen local development, enhance  	decentralization and empower local councils;
\0xEF Propose new and review existing legislations in line with sustainable development needs; \0xEF  	Establish technical committees/working groups as required.
Part 3 n Policy and Enabling Environment
The Coordination Committee provides direct supervision and management during the preparation of the EDPs and ensures mainstreaming of the SDGs, targets and indicators within the national plans and interaction among the working groups. The committee is headed by the Secretary General of MOPIC with membership from line ministries, Government, and other stakeholders. Its terms of reference include:
\0xEF Managing the development of national executive plans and mainstreaming of 2030 Agenda 
 goals, targets, and indicators within national plans and strategies, while nurturing harmonization  between the 2030 Agenda and other development sectors;
\0xEF Reviewing and endorsing the deliverables received from sectoral working groups and ensuring  	coordination among different development sectors;
 
\0xEF Reviewing monitoring reports and indicators before submission to the National Higher  	Committee for Sustainable Development.
The Working Groups define objectives and actions based on the EDP and in alignment with the SDGs, targets and indicators. The working groupsi terms of reference include:
\0xEF Analyse opportunities and threats related to the achievement of the Sustainable Development Agenda. 
\0xEF Identifying medium to long-term sectorial priorities and goals, programmes, projects,  	initiatives, policies and procedures needed to reach those goals;
\0xEF Mainstreaming gender into national plans;
\0xEF Mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda and its goals, targets and indicators into national executive  
 	plans (EDPs);
\0xEF Identifying required results-based monitoring indicators;
\0xEF Prioritizing development projects and identifying their funding needs. 
To ensure better resonance between the national priorities and the SDGs, the composition of the groups was adjusted and two new working groups focused on \0xECGender Equality and \0xECHuman Rights and Freedom of Expression were established. Members of these two new groups will also be embedded within the other groups to ensure inter-connectedness and complementarity. All committees have members from the private sector and the CSOs.
The following table demonstrates the linkages between the work of the 18 working groups across the 17 SDGs and will be further refined to reflect additional emerging connections:

Table 1: Preliminary analysis of linkages between the 18 working groups and the 17 SDGs
3.4  GOALS, TARGETS AND INDICATORS n MAPPING AGAINST THE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK
A mapping was conducted between late 2016 and early 2017, comparing goals, targets and indicators from the 2030 Agenda with the national development framework.  This was done with the inclusive participation of a wide range of ministries and government institutions, in cooperation with UN agencies. The mapping demonstrated that all goals and most targets are important for Jordan, albeit to varying degrees, especially at the target and indicator levels, it further revealed that:
1. The SDGs and associated targets are well mainstreamed into the \0xECJordan 2025, EDP and other national strategies;
 
2. On average, 40% of the indicators are considered Tier I, varying from 0 to 14% for SDG14 and SDG15 respectively and 67% for SDG7;
3. The sources of data, baselines, targets, and frequency of most of the Tier I indicators were identified.

Figure 7: Percentage of indicators per goal, for which baselines are available (Tier 1 Indicators)
The following priorities were also highlighted:
standards;
further explored and clarified;
cover data gaps;



4. NATIONAL PRIORITIES
The theme for this yearis High Level Political Forum (HLPF) on Sustainable Development will focus on \0xECEradicating Poverty and Promoting Prosperity in a Changing World. This is at the heart of the \0xECJordan 2025 blueprint, which is built upon four pillars: 
1. Citizens
2. Society
3. Business 
4. Government 
A resilient and prosperous Jordan requires sustaining peace and security, safeguarding development gains, addressing the increased pressures on resources, infrastructure and services across the country, and systematically working to reduce all forms of inequality, including geographic and gender-based disparities, while empowering women and youth. 
For a resource-poor country like Jordan, prosperity can only be achieved by continuing to invest qualitatively in human resources, beginning with quality education that is in line with labour market needs and enhancing the enabling environment for inclusive and sustainable engagement of all people. This VNR report addresses the following goals: SDG1 (No Poverty), SDG2 (No Hunger), SDG3 (Good Health and Well-being), and SDG5 (Gender Equality), and SDG9 (Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure). It will also discuss other priorities for Jordan with a focus on: Education (SDG4), Water (SDG6), Energy (SDG7), Prosperity and Decent Work (SDG8), Environment and climate change (SDG13), and Justice, human rights, and participation (SDG16).  The review will be based upon the five key themes articulated in the SDG framework:
1. People
2. Planet
3. Prosperity
4. Peace and security 
5. Partnerships
 

Figure 8 : Sustainable development and the linkages between the \0xEC5Pis
?
4.1 	People
We are determined to end poverty and hunger, in all their forms and dimensions, and to ensure that all human beings can fulfil their potential in dignity and equality and in a healthy environment.
Jordan has a youthful and dynamic population and places special attention on their wellbeing, genuinely investing in them as its agents of change, its present and its future.  This was demonstrated by His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein Bin Abdullah II in his speech at the 2015 \0xECGlobal Forum on Youth, Peace and Security in Jordan.  \0xECI assure you that the young people of my generation do not lack the will to take action. On the contrary, they are the most aware of the challenges facing their homelands. They are the most knowledgeable of the advancements of their times; and they are the most capable of listening to the world and communicating with it because they have mastered the language of this age, with the cyberspace carrying their voice from East to West across all borders and restrictions. 
According to the 2015 census, two thirds of the countryis population are below the age of 30 and 28.6% are in the 15-29 age group. This demographic transition and the increase in the percentage of young working-age population provide Jordan with a unique window of opportunity, and with the potential for huge economic prosperity, should sound investments be made in the development and capacity of the countryis youth.  
The Government of Jordan is constantly supporting the ambitions of young people and nurturing their energy and aspirations, setting up mechanisms for their meaningful engagement in the countryis development process and their genuine involvement in designing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating national programmes that will lead to achieving national goals, including sustainable development goals.
Over the past decades, Jordan has considered priority to provide young men and women with educational opportunities, much-needed skills and an enabling environment for entrepreneurship and socio-political engagement. In addition, the country has invested heavily in setting up the infrastructure required to optimize youth development including youth centres, hostels, sports facilities and volunteersi camps.
In 2016, the National Strategy for Human Resources Development (2016-2025) launched a vision reimagining the education system to create a generation of world leaders, with specific measurable objectives focused on modernizing curricula, upgrading the process of qualifying and training teachers, expanding pre-school education and nurseries, universal secondary education, substantially increasing the number of youth equipped with technical and vocational skills and ensuring their fair access to higher education. Complementing this, the National Employment Strategy (2011-2020) aims to absorb the unemployed (especially unemployed youth) and match their skills with the market requirements, increase their productivity, and substantially reduce the number of young people not in education, employment or training (NEET).
While Jordan has always boasted about its educated young population, this is not equally translated into decent work and employment as 35.6% of youth (15-24 years) are unemployed and more than a third of young graduates wait at least two years before gaining fulfilling employment.
Youth are constantly challenged by evolving social behaviors and cultures surrounding them.  Youth access to the new media, especially social media, and the vast amount of information readily available to them, have substantially enhanced their engagement as global citizens. However, this also challenges key social norms and values that are very much part of the countryis culture and identity.  The Government, therefore, places high importance on providing youth with the life-skills they require to make informed decisions throughout all aspects of their lives, based on the countryis values and norms, enshrined within its religion and heritage and placing value upon diversity, human rights and promoting respect, tolerance and peace. 
The National Youth Empowerment Strategy for the years (2017-2025), currently under development, focuses on five thematic priority areas for young people: education, economic empowerment, active citizenship, health and peace and security, with full mainstreaming of the SDGs. 
The strategy builds upon the energy, motivation, equal access to opportunities, and active participation of youth.  It gives youth a pivotal role as peace makers and positive change leaders, exposing them to educational opportunities, building their personal capacities and skills, enhancing their positive civic engagement, sense of identity and access to health services. It cultivates hope, and provides youth with the formal and informal educational opportunities, skills, experiences and networks that break the vicious cycle of socioeconomic marginalization and civic apathy.
Moving forward, the Government will renew its commitments to keeping youth among its top priorities and will incrementally engage in the following:
1. Improve the quality of education and training opportunities for youth of all ages;
2. Increase the participation of young people in the economic, social, political, environmental and cultural fields;
3. Provide specialized programmes to integrate young people into the labor market and ensure them decent work opportunities;
4. Encourage innovations and technological initiatives by young people and their implementation;
5. Expand youth-friendly health services capable of responding to the health needs of young people;
6. Support family and community programmes aimed at nurturing the positive potential of young people as agents of change in their families and communities;
7. Widen the outreach and programmes offered by youth facilities throughout the country, in line with their identified needs and aspirations;
8. Strengthen the role of youth in volunteerism and community service (active citizenship).
Poverty Eradication
Jordan has ratified all international treaties and conventions related to human rights, guided by a strong conviction that a citizen who is a rights-holder and who enjoys a life of dignity and respect is one who is capable of carrying out his/her responsibilities as an active partner in the countryis sustainable development. The Jordanian Constitution and other laws and legislations guarantee the rights of all citizens without any form of discrimination, guaranteeing equality, safeguarding the right to work and education, personal freedom and freedom of expression.  
Basic education is free and compulsory for all, as are maternal and child health services, services for the elderly and people with disabilities. The Government has linked household eligibility to direct cash-assistance for the National Aid Fund to the provision of proof of childrenis school enrollment and adequate health care provision, sending a clear message surrounding the importance attached to the health and education of its children.
Successive governments have given priority to womenis rights and their empowerment, focusing on increasing their participation in the economic, social and political sectors. Furthermore, the Government 

has worked with civil society organizations to adopt a rights-based, social development approach in an effort to empower the poor through several economic programmes, micro-financing and linking them with the labour market.
Jordanis approach to fighting poverty is based upon a comprehensive social protection concept with limited direct interventions to support those most in need, consistent with SDG1 of the 2030 Agenda and its associated targets.
The absolute poverty rate (food and non-food) dropped from approximately 21% in 1990 to 14.4% in 2010. Although the poverty rate remained at approximately 14% during the period covering 2002-2010, the aim of \0xECJordan 2025 is to reduce it to 8% in 2025, and to reach 7% in 2030.
The proportion of people living below the abject poverty line (food-poverty line) dropped from 6.6% in 1992 to 0.32% in 2010. Extreme poverty is expected to be eliminated by 2020 and the Gini index1 is expected to decrease from 0.376 in 2014 to 0.25 in 2025. 
In 2012, the Government published a report on the development/comparison of the Quality of Life Index 
(QLI) in Jordan during the period 2002-2010 by comparing the results of the Financial Conditions Index (FCI) and the Human Development Index (HDI) with the results of poverty measures which are based on household consumption calculations. This was accomplished in order to develop a multi-dimensional poverty index specific to Jordan (still in progress), based on the right to a decent and dignified life as opposed to the fulfillment of basic-needs approach. 
Poverty reduction continues to receive primary attention not only as a basic human right and one of the most important sustainable development goals, but also as a peace and security issue, especially in light of the instabilities and conflicts surrounding the country. The following are among the proposed government strategic directions to further advance poverty reduction in Jordan:  
1. Despite the high incidence of poverty in rural areas and existing poverty pockets, the number of economically underprivileged people in rural areas does not exceed 33.5% of the total figure in the kingdom. In other words, poverty in Jordan may be dominated by urban poverty, which has different characteristics from rural poverty, but a high social price if not addressed. The Government will attempt to balance this disparity;
2. The role of the NGO Support Fund, established in the Register of Societies will be enhanced. Efforts will be made to ensure that their funding criteria are based upon innovation and excellence, and that the role of NGOs and CSOs in addressing social and developmental challenges in local communities will be further enhanced;
3. Corporate Social Responsibility will be promoted and private sector further encouraged to support development projects and programmes targeting poverty reduction and improvement of  the quality of life in disadvantaged areas;   
4. The feasibility of developing and adopting social impact bonds/pay-for-performance contracts, which are being adopted in other countries, will be studied;
5. The mechanisms of targeted cash assistance will be improved; 
6. The quality-of-life index methodology will be adopted to assess the impact of poverty reduction policies, programmes and procedures, to reduce disparities between regions and population groups;
7. The new National Strategy for Social Protection and Poverty Eradication (2018-2025) is under development and will be ready by end of 2017.
Food Security
Jordan has always attached priority to the issue of food security, from both an access and availability standpoint. The most recent estimates show that the prevalence of food insecurity in the country remains excessively high: the Food Insecurity Experience Scale survey shows that 12.8% of the total population was affected by severe food insecurity during the period of 2014-2016. The latest data on stunting shows that 7.7% of children under five years of age suffered from some form of under-nutrition in 2012.      
In terms of food availability, food security is closely linked to population growth and reliance on the global commodity markets. In 2013, DOS reports estimated that the official yearly overall growth rate was 2.21%. This growth rate has changed significantly after the influx of hundreds of thousands of Syrian refugees during the years since 2011. The results of the last census (2015) indicated that the average rate of population growth over the period 2004-2015 (the two recent censuses) was 5.3%. They also showed that the average population growth rate for the same period was 3.1% for Jordanian nationals and 18% for non-Jordanians. 
This situation has translated into a sharp rise in the import of basic food commodities and inflation, affecting the poor disproportionately. With 81% of its food requirements procured externally, Jordan is highly vulnerable to fluctuations in international prices of basic commodities. Satisfying the growing demand for food, by a growing population, will need to be addressed within the context of extreme water scarcity, as the demand for water for domestic use and sanitation services is increasing for Jordanian and non-Jordanian residents alike. This struggle falls among many other economic and social challenges.
As mentioned above, the absolute poverty rate (food and non-food) was 14.4% in 2010, and the abject poverty rate (food poverty) was 0.32 % in 2010. The rural poor make up 33.5% of the total poor in Jordan, the disadvantaged among rural populations are often the first victims of natural resource degradation and are impacted by crisis more severely than any other segment of the population. Lack of employment opportunities, poor labour productivity and lack of decent employment in agriculture are, therefore, a serious constraint to food security in Jordan. This situation also contributes to increasing rural-urban migration and the accumulation of food insecure people in the cities.
Adequate water is a fundamental element in food production. Consequently, water is a vital issue in food security from the perspective of providing safe and adequate food supplies in the short and longterm. Given the multiple-use dimension of water resources, there has always been competition for the limited amount of available water between the municipal, agriculture, industrial and tourism sectors. The portion of water resources allocated to agriculture has dropped from about 70% a couple of decades ago, to 51% at the end of 2013. Agriculture will, therefore, have to optimize the productivity of water, in terms of its efficiency of use, value added, job opportunities provided by this sector, and develop mechanisms that better reflect the value of water in agricultural production.
Food and agricultural production is facing many challenges, including: limited availability of surface water resources in the Jordan Valley; the rapid depletion of groundwater resources in the uplands due to over-exploitation; inefficient and misuse of irrigation water; and degradation of soil and water quality. Small size holdings, especially in the Jordan Valley and weak extension services that link agricultural research results with farmers are additional constraints. Another major challenge facing the agriculture sector is marketing that is closely linked to high post-harvest losses; inefficient markets; food safety issues; and the difficulties to ensure production that meets quality standards. The recent loss of some export markets has also affected agriculture considerably.
In response to the challenges of food security and agriculture, the Government has developed the National Strategy for Agricultural Development in addition to the National Water Strategy in line with the \0xECJordan 2025. Policies have been developed that will increase growth in agricultural production. 
Health and Well-being
Jordan has witnessed substantial achievements in all aspects related to ensuring the right to health and a fulfilling life. Life expectancy at birth has increased to 72.7 for males and 76.7 for females. Under-five mortality rates have dropped from 37 per 1,000 live births in 1990 to 21 per 1,000 live births in 2012. Similarly, infant mortality rates have decreased from 34 to 17 over the same period, but with remaining disparities where mortalities are higher among poorest households and in the Southern governorates. Most deaths now occur in the first month of life (the neonatal period); of the 17 per thousand deaths recorded in 2012, 14 took place during the first month of life. This requires focused attention in the coming years on the peri-natal period and on womenis health and reproductive health. The results of the upcoming Demographic and Health Survey in late 2017 will shed more light on the trends to date. The Government has set a target to reduce infant mortality (with a special focus on neo-natal mortality) and under-five mortality rates by two thirds to reach 6 and 7 per 1,000 live births respectively by 2030.
Maternal health has greatly improved over the last decades and Maternal Mortality Ratio is 19 per 100,000 live births based on a maternal mortality study conducted in 2008, while 99.6% of births are attended by a qualified birth attendant. Future improvement will depend on better targeting of more vulnerable cases, and a reduction in disparities in the quality of health care provided to all women of child-bearing age.
As advancements are witnessed at the national level, concrete steps to improve sub-national data gathering and strengthen administrative records and active surveillance become even more important, in order to improve the health and wellbeing of harder-to-reach populations. 
Jordan is currently implementing the National Strategy for Reproductive Health/Family Planning (20132018), through a close partnership between the Ministry of Health and other partners. The Strategy outlines a comprehensive framework for reproductive health/family planning in order to ensure a demographic transition in the country by 2040. Jordan aims to reach a total fertility rate of 2.1 per women of childbearing age, to support changes in social and economic policies to attain the demographic opportunity, and further strengthen available maternal and child health services.
In addition to further improving health services (especially in governorates), Jordan will be focusing on strengthening civil registration and hospital records to enable proper capturing and investigating of maternal and child deaths, while also striving to address their causes. The percentage of the population in Jordan with health insurance is now 55% and 68% among Jordanians. \0xECJordan 2025 sets the target at 95% in 2025, and the Government is aiming to reach 100% coverage by 2030. Within this context, the Ministry of Health recently agreed to sign the Global Partnership Compact towards universal health coverage. The Ministry of Health is also undertaking a health system governance review to support the design of an effective strategy in line with national goals and SDG3 in an effort to accelerate the achievement of universal health coverage. 
A health sector vulnerability assessment conducted in 2015 identified the need for 2,886 additional hospital beds, 22 comprehensive health centres, and approximately 1,000 doctors and 2,000 nurses to cope with the increasing pressure on the health system due to the Syria crisis.  The Government is also vigilantly ensuring that previous gains in polio and measles eradication are not compromised, especially in light of polio outbreaks witnessed in Syria and Iraq over the past years. Several blanket immunization campaigns have been conducted since 2011, covering all children in Jordan.
In recent years, Jordan has undergone a significant epidemiological transition towards non communicable diseases (NCDs) which account for three quarters of total deaths in Jordan. Furthermore, Jordan is also experiencing a changing demographic profile, with increasing burden on national health care systems and services with high costs of secondary and tertiary care. Determinants of poor health and unhealthy behaviors such as tobacco use (especially among youth) and inappropriate diets are becoming increasingly prevalent in Jordan and are contributing to the increased incidence of NCDs. 
In the coming years, Jordan will continue placing a special focus on safeguarding its development gains and further improving all of the health indicators. \0xECJordan 2025 has outlined key areas of focus, including: improving the quality of health services, improving the institutional framework in the health sector, developing an effective health insurance system, strengthening partnerships and cooperation, improving education of medical professionals, and controlling the emergence or re-emergence of infectious diseases. The SDGs related to health are mostly focused on primary healthcare and preventative care which will remain among the national health priorities. Jordan will also emphasize secondary and tertiary care, and national targets and indicators which have been set in national plans will be harmonized with the SDG indicators. Finally, the government is currently implementing an e-health initiative, \0xECHakeem, to automate the public healthcare sector in Jordan. The initiative is intended to significantly transform the health sector in Jordan and facilitate efficient, high-quality healthcare through the nationwide implementation of an Electronic Health Record solution (EHR).
Quality Education
Jordanis human resources system has been historically well-developed in many areas, and Jordanians have been generally educated, competent and competitive, capable of providing the Jordanian economy and society as well as the region with a strong workforce actively contributing to its sustainable development. The education sector has been one of the cornerstones of Jordanis development, and reforms to prepare the foundations of a knowledge economy have been actively pursued. With a diverse mixture of state and private providers offering teaching from kindergarten through to higher education, the country can also rely on initiatives to promote research and entrepreneurship.
Higher education is a priority for the Government and plays a key role in the process of comprehensive development at various levels and areas. During the last two decades, higher education has witnessed prominent progress evidenced by the increasing number of higher education institutions and students. Commendable achievements have been made: Jordan reached gender parity in primary education as early as 1979, enrollment rates in basic education reached 94%, and 68.4% in secondary education, teacher training is continuously undergoing improvements through a range of initiatives and new approaches that are eagerly piloted.  
In recent years, however, a number of factors, including the impact of the Syria crisis, have placed serious pressures on Jordanis education system and achievements, and on its ability to meet the changing market needs in the country and to respond to growing stress on public education infrastructure. This has led to an increase in the number of overcrowded and double-shift schools in the country.
In response to the emerging challenges, a National Conference on Human Resource Development was held in late 2015 to launch Jordanis National Human Resource Development Strategy 2016-2025, which focuses on setting a vision for talent-driven prosperity in the country and on a human resource development system that will deliver tangible results for the Kingdom, children/students/learners, education providers and teachers as well as the community as a whole. 
The conference proposed key recommendations on the way forward focusing on: developing the structure of the educational ladder and educational tracks; continuous curricula development in specialized educational studies; systematic teacher professional growth; promoting education environments conducive to learning and in tune with the various student needs; ensuring equal learning opportunities across the Kingdom;  institutionalizing readiness to international tests like the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA) and Trends in International Mathematics and Science Studies (TIMSS) to improve Jordanis ranking; and finally, on restructuring technical specializations aligned with market needs and higher education programmes. 
The National Human Resource Development Strategy applies five key, governing principles related to access, quality, accountability, innovation and mindset to four key stages in the education system in Jordan: Early Childhood Education and Development (ECED), Basic and Secondary Education, Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET) and Higher Education (HE).
In alignment with the Strategy, the National Centre for Curricula Development was established in early 2017 to attract specialized expertise in order to support the continuous development of educational materials, submitting these to the Higher Council of the Centre for Curricula Development for review and accreditation under the law. This action encourages continuous curricula development and lifelong learning. 
Jordan has 197 vocational training secondary schools for both males and females that provide training for about 29,150 students across four different professional branches (industrial, agricultural, home economics, hotel education). The vocational training programme includes 15 specializations: 10 specializations in industrial education, 3 in home economics and one specialization for each of the agriculture and hotel management.
The percentage of enrollment in vocational education for males is 17.94% and 12.81% for females, with a total of 15.03% of the tenth grade students. This very low percentage is due to a number of intertwined factors ranging from negative social norms and taboos associated with vocational training professions, to funding constraints and lack of effective coordination mechanisms among the suppliers of vocational education and training.  
This percentage may increase in light of an operational plan to widen access to vocational education, which requires a review of curricula to better reflect the needs of the labour market, and the adoption of the national qualifications framework in all TVET institutions in the public and private sectors and civil society institutions.
Early childhood education and development services are still not available in sufficient numbers to the public. The combined enrollment rate for kindergarten one (KG1) and two (KG2) is 32.9%, while the enrollment rate for KG2 is 59%. Although KG2 enrollment has increased, there is still an urgent need to provide 2,800 classrooms in order to accommodate all children between the ages of five and six. Enrollment rates in KG1, which is currently almost exclusively provided by the private sector, is about 18%, while the enrollment rate for nurseries is only 3%. There is, therefore, a need to raise enrollment rates in all regions of the Jordan by at least 2% annually. 
The education policy in Jordan for the near future will integrate the concepts and principles of sustainable development in all stages of education, which will help build a responsible generation and contribute to economic, social and environmental development.
Gender Equality
The adoption of the 2030 Agenda represents an opportunity to make a tangible shift in participatory development planning approaches and mechanisms to mainstream gender into all national development plans in the years to come.
As mentioned in part I of this report, the National Higher Committee for Sustainable Development now includes Jordanian National Commission for Women (JNCW) and representatives from civil society coalitions. Two additional working groups were formed to better align the working groups of the EDP with the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs: the Gender Equality Working Group, headed by JNCW, and the Human Rights and Freedom of Expression Working Group. The Gender Equality Working Group includes representatives of civil society, ministries and relevant governmental and national institutions, including the DOS, to ensure that data on the indicators required to monitor the implementation of SDG5 and other goals related to gender equality and womenis empowerment are properly reflected. The Gender Equality Working Group will also ensure coordination with regular reporting mechanisms established to account on commitments to international treaties and conventions.
As part of the \0xECJordan 2025 and the EDP covering 2016-2019, a set of strategic goals related to the empowerment of women within the health, education, poverty, social protection, employment and labour force participation have been developed.  
Over the past decade in Jordan, womenis participation throughout all walks of life has steadily improved. The percentage of female judges in the judiciary system is now 18.5%, women make up 35.5% of political party members, 37.8% of municipal councils, 21% of trade unions, 19.9% of diplomatic corps, 8% of professional syndicates, 7.9% of chambers of industry and 0.6% of chambers of commerce. Despite these achievements, there are still a number of social and political challenges facing gender equality and women empowerment that act as barriers to changing the stereo-types related to womenis roles within social, political or economic spheres.
To address these challenges and further build upon progress achieved thus-far, Jordan aspires to increase womenis political participation in all political forums, especially in local councils. Jordan is continuously reviewing its legislative system to further empower women, ensure their access to decision-making processes and protect them from all forms of discrimination and violence. The following are some remarkable results to date: 
\0xEF The 2016 Electoral Law for the Lower House of Parliament raised the womenis quota for seats from 10% to 11.5%. This is in addition to any seat that women could take in open competition. In 2016, the percentage of women in the upper and lower houses of parliament reached 15.4%. 
\0xEF The 2015 Decentralization Law allocated a 10% quota for women in the elected seats in addition to a third of the appointed seats, thus ensuring a total of 15% of seats within the Governoratesi Councils are reserved for women.
\0xEF The Municipalities Law allocated 25% of the Municipal Councilsi seats for women.
\0xEF Bylaw number 48 on the Alimony Advancement Fund was issued in 2015 to expedite the enforcement of alimony for the wife, children and the elderly. 
\0xEF The 2016 Bylaw number 171 on shelters for women at risk was issued. 
\0xEF The Flexible Work Bylaw was issued in 2017.
\0xEF The 2017 Law on Domestic Violence. 
In addition, a home-based business licensing legislation has been enacted that will start to contribute to increasing womenis economic empowerment and formalizing womenis informal businesses that are not being captured in formal economic participation statistics.  
Moreover, the draft revision of the Penal Code is currently being reviewed by parliament. If endorsed, it will repeal Article 308 of the law, which allows the rapist to escape punishment by marrying the victim, and amend Article 98, so that crimes committed in the name of honour are no longer exempt from full enforcement of the law.
Jordanis ranking is 134 out of 144 countries in the 2016 global Gender Gap Index and has dropped to 138th of 144 countries in the index on womenis economic opportunities. Jordanian womenis entry into the labour market has been mainly concentrated in the health and education sectors. As per \0xECJordan 2025, Jordan aims to increase womenis economic participation from 13.2% in 2016 to 27% in 2025. Women continue to face a wage gap of 33%, mainly concentrated in the private sector. The per capita income of females is USD3,587 compared to USD 18,831 for males in 2015. The National Committee on Fair Pay has submitted a proposal to the Council of Ministers in favour of the amendment of 11 articles of the Labour Law to eliminate gender discrimination in employment and wages, promote women and family-friendly working environments, increase maternity leave days, introduce paternity leave (as is currently found in the public sector), and provide nurseries for those employed in private enterprises. The Jordanian National Plan of Action for the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 for the years (2017-2020) is being finalized to ensure the full and effective participation of women in security and peace and to ensure equal opportunities for women to lead on an equal footing with men at all levels of decision-making. The plan focuses on four main outcomes: 
1. Achieve the active participation of women working in security, military and peacekeeping sectors; 
2. Achieve the active participation of women in the processes of peace-building and peace- making and in combating extremist ideologies and violent extremism; 
3. Provide gender-sensitive services (including psychosocial, legal and medical services) and facilitate safe access for Jordanians and refugees (including women and girls most vulnerable to violence and in need of protection) in host communities and refugee camps; 
4. Recognize the contributions and the role of women and youth in achieving security and peace.
Womenis empowerment is supported by a strong political will at the highest levels. His Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn Al Hussein has shared a number of discussion papers to encourage a national dialogue on the political reforms and transformations in Jordan. These discussion papers stress the positive contributions of women in all political, economic, social, environmental and cultural fields recognizing women as crucial partners in sustainable development and reforms for a better future.  
4.2 Planet
We are determined to protect the planet from degradation, including through sustainable consumption and production, sustainably managing its natural resources and taking urgent action on climate change, so that it can support the needs of the present and future.
 
Water Availability and Sustainability
Jordan is facing complex challenges as a result of the geo-political environment of the region and the chronic water scarcity that it has traditionally experienced. The increase in population has placed a further strain on the very limited water resources of the country. Water management in Jordan has focused on prioritizing supplying water for human consumption. The country has reviewed its development plans and strategic options within the context of other crucial resources, i.e., the production of food and generation of energy to ensure a better understanding of the water-food-energy nexus. 
Almost all Jordanians have access to safe drinking water, estimated at 94% through water supply networks. However, the daily per capita water consumption is low; average consumption is 74.7 litres/person/day and the government is working to raise this to approximately 122.6 litres/person/day by 2030. 
The agriculture sector is considered the largest user in terms of water use, using 51% of Jordanis water followed by the municipalities which utilize 45%. The industrial sector makes use of 4%. The sewage service coverage in Jordan in 2015 was around 58%. 
In addition, Jordan reuses approximately 93% of its treated wastewater for agriculture and is exploring additional sources of supply, such as deep aquifers, brackish and large-scale seawater desalination (Red Sea-Dead Sea Water Conveyance Project which is currently under a PPP tendering process). Efforts are being made to optimize the use of existing resources by reducing physical and commercial losses and improving energy efficiency in water treatment and distribution.
The \0xECWater for Life: Water Strategy in Jordan for (2016-2025) has captured national efforts to manage the water sector and ensure optimal service levels. The strategy focuses on the limited freshwater resources and on the responsibility of all citizens, government and civil society as partners in responsible water management, protection and sustainable use. The strategy is based on the integrated water resource management approach and includes policies and strategic directions in water and sanitation, and working mechanisms with the agriculture, energy, industry, tourism and environment sectors. The key areas of the Strategy are as follows: 
1. Integrated Water Resources Management;
2. Water, sewage and sanitation services;
3. Water for irrigation, energy and other uses; 
4. Institutional reform; 
5. Sector information management and monitoring. 
The Strategy would also address crosscutting issues of climate change adaptation; trans-boundary/ shared water resources; humanitarian-WASH sector coordination; public/private partnerships; and the economic aspects of water. The Strategy identifies the results (objectives) to be achieved and reflects the Governmentis national vision for the sustainable development of the water sector. Within the timeframe of this Strategy, the Ministry of Water and Irrigation (MWI), in coordination with other related institutions,  will adopt a sector-wide integrated water resources planning and management approach, develop sector policies and legislation to enhance performance, equitable service provision and optimization of available resources, initiate institutional reforms to restructure sector management, enhance fiscal discipline in cost recovery, improve internal efficiencies in sector coordination and management and build technical capacity. MWI will coordinate and lead the implementation of the water-related SDGs and targets in coordination with other relevant stakeholders in Jordan. The ministry will also assess more fully the available amounts, actual quality and natural protection of Jordanis water resources as a foundation for effective decision making, develop new partnerships with civil society and engage with all stakeholders through regular consultations in water sector project planning, thus building awareness of the efficient use and conservation of water and protecting water infrastructure.
 
Under the new strategy, the Government is working towards a target of 84% of wastewater service coverage by 2030 and will continue expanding the sewage network. The re-use of the water from sewage plants (effluent) reached 93% in 2015 and is forecasted to reach approximately 96% in 2030. These are expected to increase to 373.22 million cubic meters by 2030, an increase of 150% compared to the current measurements which were 147 million cubic meters in 2015. 
Affordable and Reliable Energy
During the past decades, Jordan has been able to maintain the security of it energy supply by diversifying its sources of imported energy, developing local and renewable energy sources,  rationalizing energy consumption intensity and improving its efficiency, in order to ensure access of energy supplies to all segments of society and development sectors at reasonable prices. Jordan currently imports 95% of its total primary energy mix, mainly crude oil and its derivatives and natural gas, used to generate 88% of the countryis generated electricity. This has significantly contributed to reducing the emissions of CO2 over the previous years.
In terms of electricity, all areas in Jordan have been covered by an electricity network that meets international standards, with 99.9% of the homes receiving electricity at suitable and sustainable prices. All the electricity needs of the commercial, industrial, and tourism sectors are met on a regular and affordable basis. Jordan has worked closely with neighboring countries to strengthen regional electrical connections through linking with the Syrian Arab Republic and the Arab Republic of Egypt.
As part of the countryis drive to strengthen partnership with the private sector, the Government has provided incentives to the private sector to invest in infrastructure projects by establishing electricity generation projects. Build-Own-Operate (BOO) and Build-Own-Transfer (BOT) power generation projects have been expanded with international and local companies alike.
Jordan aims to increase the contribution of renewable energy to its total primary energy mix to reach 10% in 2020, equivalent to about 20% of the total electricity generated, the Government is working on setting higher targets by 2030. Jordan also intends to expand the use of natural gas, which contributed 35.3% to the total energy mix in 2016. Furthermore, nuclear energy will contribute about 43% of electricity generated by 2030, which is equivalent to 22% of the total primary energy mix, leading to a significant reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. The Government set the target to decrease its energy consumption from 296 to 276 kg of oil equivalent to USD 1,000 at constant prices in 2030, and to strengthen its partnership with the private sector in achieving this goal. 
In order to further rationalize and optimize the efficiency of energy consumption intensity, Jordanian building codes (energy efficient buildings code and solar energy code) and the Jordan Green Building Manual have been issued to promote green buildings. 
National efforts continue to improve energy efficiency in street lighting, public buildings, commercial and industrial buildings, and places of worship, as well as measures for the use of energy-saving technology and equipment including energy-saving lamps, lighting units, tools and electrical equipment according to international standards. 
The Jordan Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Fund, established in 2012,  has played a supportive role by providing citizens with green financing to increase the efficiency of the energy being used and for the shift towards renewable energy technologies.
Environment and Climate Change Action
Climate change presents a major environmental, economic and development challenge, and the sooner it is possible to address its negative impact, the better the opportunity is to mitigate its effects at lower costs.
Jordan is affected more intensely by this phenomenon rather than contributing to it, as is the case in many developing countries. The negative effects of global warming on Jordan include: an increase in temperature; expansion in areas affected by drought; loss of some natural eco-systems; migration and habitat degradation; deforestation; rise in the incidences of forest fires; fluctuation of rainfall; recurring heat waves; decrease in the amount of water available (groundwater and surface) as a result of the decline in water flows, which in turn impact food security.
Jordanis greenhouse gas emissions total approximately 28.7 million tons per year, or 0.06% of global emissions. The annual amount of CO2 emissions per capita amount to approximately 4.41 tons at the end of 2016 and this figure is expected to rise to 5.59 tons by 2030.
The Government of Jordan strongly believes in playing a major role in the global initiatives to adapt and mitigate the effects of climate change, despite its limited resources, and has taken concrete steps to adapt and reduce the effects of climate change. 
An ambitious, evidence-based policy framework has been put in place through the National Policy on Climate Change covering various development sectors in the country. One of the most important steps taken by the Government of Jordan was the mainstreaming of objectives related to climate change within the various sectoral policies in the country, for example, within the new Water Strategy for the years (2016-2025). The Government is also accelerating its efforts in the renewable energy sector to reach 10% of the total energy mix by 2020.
Key results have been achieved: The Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Law was adopted and enacted; fuel prices liberalized, strategies adopted in the transport sector to promote energy efficiency, tax exemptions provided, and the use of low-carbon hybrid and electric transport vehicles facilitated. 
A National Commission on Clean Development Mechanism was established and Jordan has developed its first, second and third National Communications as per the Climate Change Convention agreement. Jordan has also joined the Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR) to ensure its economy is ready for climate change. In addition, the preparation of its Biennial Update Reports (BURs) has been institutionalized. 
In September 2015, Jordan submitted its Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) secretariat, it faces a host of challenges in achieving the commitments spelled out in its NDC document. Most importantly, the implementation of projects related to mitigation and adaptation to climate change and the mainstreaming of environmentally friendly green technologies requires further efforts for access to funding.
The NDC document stipulates a reduction of emissions of 14% by 2030, of which 1.5% are unconditional contributions to the availability of funding at a cost of USD 0.5 billion, while 12.5% are contingent upon the availability of funding totaling USD 5.2 billion. 
A series of measures are proposed in this regard, including: a) fundraising for the implementation of 73 projects incorporated in the NDC document in priority sectors such as energy, transport, waste management, industry, water and agriculture, b) preparation of a funding strategy for the implementation of projects included in the National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) document; c) the development of a Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) System for Green House Gas (GHG) emissions; and d) preparation of necessary legislation, including the development of a bylaw on climate change.
For the medium and long-term, the Government has adopted green economy principles and applied them at all levels. Several important steps have been taken in this regard, the most recent of which is the completion of the National Plan for Green Growth (2017-2025). This is a roadmap to encourage the public and private sector to invest in priority areas like: energy, water, transport, agriculture, tourism, and waste management, for the benefit of local communities through providing jobs and reducing unemployment.
In its efforts to shift towards sustainable production and consumption patterns, the Government has recently concluded the National Strategy and Plan of Action for Sustainable Production and Consumption (2016-2025) in the transport, waste management and agriculture/food sectors. A draft waste management framework law was prepared which would provide a legal umbrella to increase sustainable investments in the waste management and recycling sector, where the proportion of re-processed and re-used solid waste reached 15% by the end of 2016, and is expected to increase to 40% by 2030.
A number of pieces of legislation in this area, including a bylaw on manufacturing, importing and trading of biodegradable plastic bags, were issued in 2016.
Finally, the Government has put in place improved infrastructure at the hazardous waste dumping site in Swaqa and has initiated the preparations for an international tender for the establishment of comprehensive hazardous waste management units based on the principle of partnership between the public and private sectors (PPP).
All initiatives, programmes, projects and activities emanating from the aforementioned plans and strategies will be included in the Governmentis EDPs and funding will be sought through all available funding mechanisms.
With regard to (SDG14) on the conservation of the oceans, sea and marine resources, most of the targets do not apply to the situation of Jordan, especially those related to the oceans.  Therefore Jordan will pursue other more relevant targets and apply them to the Gulf of Aqaba, particularly in relation to marine pollution, ecosystem management, and marine and coastal management, where many efforts have already started. However, the major challenge is the lack of data and indicators in these fields and priority will be given to addressing these data gaps.
4.3 	Prosperity
We are determined to ensure that all human beings can enjoy prosperous and that economic, social and technological progress occurs in harmony with nature.
 
Decent Work and Economic Growth
The \0xECJordan 2025 document stresses the importance of inclusive economic growth and decent work as key priorities for the attainment of all the SDGs.  A real GDP growth rate of 7.5% is needed to create around 57,000 jobs on average per year, and to increase female labour force participation to 27% by the year 2025.
In order to achieve these priorities, a number of challenges will need to be addressed, as outlined in the National Employment Strategy (NES) and include: pro-poor growth, high structural unemployment, with focus on youth unemployment, and labour market segmentation by gender and other levels of disaggregation.
Moreover, the spillovers of protracted crises, most notably the Syria crisis, have exacerbated these challenges, making it more difficult for Jordan to achieve inclusive growth and decent work for all.  The Jordanian economy is becoming increasingly vulnerable to exogenous shocks and is experiencing limited economic growth rates, which reached 2% in 2016, compared to 5.5% in 2009.
GDP per capita also dropped to USD 3,936 in 2015 due to the increase in population. Unemployment reached 15.3% in 2016 (hitting 18.2% in quarter one of 2017), compared to 12.9% in 2009. Female unemployment is double that of males, and remains at around 24.1%, while female labour force participation is just above 13%. Youth unemployment rate reached around 35.6% in 2016, Jordanian young men and women, although educated, are finding it increasingly difficult to make the transition from education into decent work. In turn, they settle for jobs either outside their specialization or below their skill level. Fifty per cent of Jordanians are working in the informal economy.
The working poor in Jordan are becoming particularly vulnerable to sliding into extreme poverty. According to the Department of Statistics, 33.4% of all Jordanian workers, and 47.4% of youth (15n24 years), earn less than JOD 300, equivalent to approximately USD 424 per month.  In 2016, 11.3% of workers earned more than JOD 500, equivalent to approximately 706 USD per month. 
In addition, Jordan is paying close attention to the incidence of child labour, which emerged as a coping mechanism resulting from livelihoods challenges amongst both Syrian and Jordanian families. Child labour has more than doubled between 2007 and 2016 (from 33,190 to 75,981 children), which can be largely attributed to the impact of the Syria crisis on the economy and the labour market in Jordan.
Jordan has made significant progress in addressing sustainable economic growth and decent work challenges. It became the first country in the Middle East in 2012 to ratify the ILOis Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 (No. 102). In 2014, Jordan passed a new social security law that includes self-employed workers, and introduces unemployment and maternity benefits as part of national efforts to establish a national social protection floor. Moreover, the Government has extended the National Framework to Combat Child Labour (NFCL) 2011n2016 to all 12 governorates and passed a new Juvenile Law in 2014, which acknowledges that working children need special protection. 
A sector-wide collective bargaining agreement (CBA) was signed in the garment sector in 2013 and renewed in 2015; a sector in which 80% of all workers are migrants. In addition, a CBA for the private education sector was signed in February 2017, covering 37,000 teachers, the majority of whom are women. The Government and its social partners (workers and employer organizations) have further identified agro-foods, pharmaceuticals and construction as the three sectors that could potentially benefit from CBAs at the sectoral level.
The countryis achievements also include its ability to mobilize resources for the benefit of both Jordanians and Syrians. Jordan committed at the London Conference on Supporting Syria and the Region in February 2016, as part of creating hundreds of thousands of jobs for Jordanians and Syrians, to provide 200,000 jobs for Syrian refugees by 2020 without shocking its national labour market or displacing Jordanian job creation. This was also contingent upon implementing the simplified rules of origin with the EU in 18 designated industrial zones work and the international community delivering upon its commitments under the Jordan Compact, reinforced in the Jordan Output Document in the Brussels conference in April 2017. The number of work permits granted to Syrians increased from 3,800 in 2016 to around 54,000 in June 2017. Moreover, Jordan is working towards attracting new investments and opening up the European Union market with simplified rules of origin which will support the Jordanian market. In order to promote the Decent Work Agenda of the SDGs and reinforce the growth-employment-poverty nexus, Jordan will undertake a number of steps including but not limited to:
1. Introduce policies that would promote the transition from informal to formal employment;
 
2. Enhance labour market governance systems, including the strengthening of labour inspection functions and occupational safety and health;
 
3. Promote a \0xECWomen at Work national agenda addressing the structural and legal barriers that limit womenis participation in the labour market, and introducing policies that address the  various aspects of working conditions; 
 
4. Implement the National Human Resource Development Strategy and planned education reforms, with a particular focus on TVET, in order to bridge the gap between educational outcomes and the demands of the labour market;
5. Expand the National Framework on Child Labour (NFCL) to be applied to all children in Jordan;
6. Strengthen the social protection floor to ensure that the social security system is financially sustainable in the long run, to enhance the coherence of its pension system, and better harmonize public and private social security pension schemes.
Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure
Jordan boasts infrastructure of commendable quality across the transport, telecommunications, electricity, and water sectors. The Kingdom also possesses efficient development zones and industrial cities which have been established in most of the twelve governorates. Projects focused on infrastructure are considered amongst the most attractive for investment and partnership with the private sector.
The industrial sector is also considered one of the most strategic sectors within Jordanis economy, accounting for nearly 25% of the GDP, with strong links to other economic sectors. It also accounts for approximately 20% of the total labor force and is one of the main job creating sectors, following education and health. Over the past five years, the industrial sector has been able to attract 85% of foreign investment. As a result of its competitive products, the sector has managed to gain access to more than 120 markets worldwide, making up more than 90% of national exports.
A Fund for Industrial Development and Competitiveness has been established and provides technical and financial support to Jordanian companies, in an effort to develop their products and services using innovative and technological approaches with the aim of increasing their added value. The Government has also set up an industrial observatory in order to provide an integrated database focused on the sector, to help in the analysis of market competition and policy formulation.
In the upcoming years, Jordan will be guided by the components of its Industrial Policy Document to expand its industrial production base, increase its available production capacity, enhance competition within the service sectors, create a stimulating and facilitating business environment, generate jobs for Jordanians and introduce clean technology into the industry. These targets aim to increase Jordanis global competitiveness and the GDP contribution of the industrial sector by 2030.
Small and Medium Size Enterprises (SMEs) comprise 99.4% of the total industrial sector and are characterized by their diversified products and their ability to create jobs, contributing as well to reductions in poverty and disparity. However, SMEs face a number of challenges of which the most notable is access to finance. To address the marketis failure to provide official funding to Micro, Small and Medium Size Enterprises (MSMEs), the Government has facilitated access to finance through doubling bank loans granted to SMEs from 10% to 20% and creating a banking window at the Central Bank of Jordan and concessionary financing windows at commercial banks to support financing of SMEs, in addition to strengthening markets and opening up new ones for Jordanian products. Moreover, a credit bureau has been established, export and loan guarantee programs have been launched, and new legislation related to insolvency bankruptcy and liquidation are underway in parliament. Finally, multiple start-up and entrepreneurship funds have been launched and are being scaled up.
Culture as a Driver of Socio-Economic Growth 
Jordan acknowledges that culture is a driver and enabler of sustainable development and essential for achieving the 2030 Agenda as it contributes to human and socio-economic development, quality education, social inclusion, sustainable cities, environmental sustainability and peaceful societies. 
Culture and heritage also serve as a bridge between generations and peoples, providing a source of resilience to vulnerable populations. Culture is critically helping to achieve the 2030 Agenda, strengthening the link between communities and their environments and enabling vibrant cultural diversity. Jordan believes that respect for cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue can foster an environment conducive to mutual understanding and social inclusion. Engaging youth in the preservation of Jordanis rich cultural heritage is of key importance. 
Jordan hosts a vast number of archaeological sites that serve as important cultural heritage resources for the country. Aside from the renowned tourist attractions and World Heritage Sites, there are numerous, lesser-known locations that hold unexploited tourism potential if developed sustainably. Many such locations are situated within underserved areas and poverty pockets away from Amman, presenting unique opportunities for development of these local communities. 
4.4 	Peace and Security
We are determined to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies which are free from fear and violence. There can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace without sustainable development.
 
The 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda highlights the important linkages between sustainable development and peace and security, where sustainable development cannot be fully realized in the absence of peace and security within inclusive societies based on respect for human rights. At the same time, peace and security are at serious risk without sustainable development.  Jordan has witnessed this first hand, surrounded by such regional instabilities in recent years as the Arab Region grapples with complex challenges that threaten peace and security not only regionally, but throughout the world. 
 
Wars and conflicts in neighboring countries have resulted in waves of refugees and displaced persons, serious economic challenges, an increase in poverty and unemployment rates all over the region as well as heavy stresses on all infrastructure and services, both in war-torn countries and refugee hosting countries like Jordan. 
The inter-linkages between all SDGs and the holistic approach with which all people must address sustainable development on this planet are most prominently demonstrated when addressing peace and security for all.
Equally important is the issue of justice, which is an important contributing factor in sustainable development based on the rule of law. In 2016, a Royal Committee for Judicial Reform and Rule of Law was commissioned by HM King Abdullah II Ibn Al Hussein to review the institutional and legislative barriers impacting rule of law and independence and effectiveness of the judiciary. The committee issued several legislative amendments that will enhance criminal justice and transparency in Jordan. 
Based on the recommendations of the Royal Committee, an action plan has been formulated which incorporates several items related to enhancing judicial independence, including restructuring the judicial council and improving judicial inspection process while creating specializations among judiciary. In addition, the recommendations outlined steps to limit case delays, to facilitate the undertaking of criminal justice, and to guarantee fair trial standards, by ensuring early access to lawyers in police stations, expanding access to legal aid as well as adopting more controls on detention, and overall training of prosecutors and judges. As an output to this Royal Committee, 12 laws are to be discussed at the extra-ordinary session of Parliament starting 4 July 2017:
\0xEF Draft law amending the Judicial Independence Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Formation of Civil Courts Law.
\0xEF Draft Magistrate Courts Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Civil Procedure Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Penal Code.
\0xEF A bill amending the Criminal Court Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Criminal Procedure Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Evidence Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the State Lawsuit Management Law.
\0xEF A bill amending the Judicial Execution Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Arbitration Law.
\0xEF Draft law amending the Mediation for Settling Civil Disputes Law.
The Government of Jordan has launched efforts to establish a national legal aid system to improve access to justice and protect the right to defense in criminal courts. Lack of resources is a serious barrier towards this endeavor that Jordan is keen to implement. The Ministry of Justice has established a legal aid unit within its structure to receive requests for legal assistance and established partnerships with the Jordan Bar Association and civil society organizations to refer those requests to them. 
The new penal code amendments include alternatives to incarceration sentencing in misdemeanor cases which will reduce prison populations. Jordan is aiming to reduce the percentage of non-convicted detainees in rehabilitation centres from 75% to 40% and to increase the percentage of accused persons represented by lawyers in criminal cases from 32% to 68% both by 2030.
Jordan has always played a key role in peace building. The Jordanian Armed Forces have participated actively in peace-keeping operation in conflict areas around the world and provided medical and other service to people affected.
Jordan fully acknowledges the vital role women play in peace-building and peace-keeping and the Jordanian National Plan of Action for the Implementation of Security Council Resolution 1325 is being developed to ensure the full and effective participation of women in security and peace.  
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein Bin Abdullah II has been an avid advocate for the role of youth in sustainable development and in peace-building, highlighting the important role they play. The Crown Prince chaired in 2015 the UN Security Council (UNSC) open debate on the \0xECRole of Youth in Countering Violent Extremism and Promoting Peace focusing on the importance of engaging youth in peacemaking, countering violence and boosting security in conflict-afflicted areas. The open debate addressed the connection between youth, violent extremism, sustainable development, and the social and economic dimensions. 
The Crown Prince stated: \0xECWhile youth are most susceptible to the present situation and its consequences, they can also have the strongest impact on the present and the future. This has been evident in the recent events in my region. As a young man, who is part of this generation, I take part in debates about the challenges facing my generation and the need to empower youth.
\0xECThere is much talk about youth being a marginalised segment of society. Allow me to say that they are not a marginalised group, but rather a targeted group. They are targeted for their huge potential, selfconfidence and ability to change the world.
His Royal Highnessis commitment and support led to the hosting of the First International Global Forum of Youth, Peace and Security in Amman in August, 2015, a month before the September Sustainable Development Summit in New York. 
Furthermore, Jordan sponsored and led international efforts that culminated in the unanimous adoption in December 2015, of a ground-breaking resolution on Youth, Peace and Security which recognizes that \0xECyoung people play an important and positive role in the maintenance and promotion of international peace and security. The resolution identifies five key pillars for action: participation, protection, prevention, partnerships and finally disengagement and reintegration.  Jordan will continue to lead international and local efforts to strengthen the role of youth in peace-making and peace-building.  
Jordan also acknowledges the fundamental role of media in promoting peace and stability. Freedom to express views is central to empowering people to contribute to decisions that affect their lives. The Jordanian Constitution includes strong guarantees for freedom of expression and of the media. HM King Abdullah II Ibn Al Hussein has consistently affirmed the freedom of the media, urging the Government to provide a proper balance between the principles of freedom and responsibility. Jordan was the first country in the Arab World to adopt the right to information legislation in the form of the 2007 Law to Guarantee the Right to Access Information.  
The Comprehensive National Plan for Human Rights for 2016-2025 adopted by the Government outlines specific goals to enhance the right to the freedom of opinion and expression. The plan emphasizes key steps that include, among others, a review of the relevant legislations for the media and freedom of expressions in line with international conventions, and the amendments and activation of the law that ensure the right to access information.  



Part 5 - MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
5- MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
We are deteremined to mobilize the means required to implement this Agenda through a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, based on a spirit of strengthened global solidarity, focused in particular on the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable and with the participation of all countries, all stakeholders and all people.
 
5.1  FINANCING: EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL
Jordan has taken a number of steps to increase and strengthen internal financing and to optimize the use of its available resources. Capital expenditures have been linked to the EDP, thereby ensuring priority funding dedicated to the Agendais implementation, which is mainstreamed in the EDP. 
An increasingly steady flow of further medium and long-term commitments and support from the international community are crucial to achieving the SDGs, to remain resilient in the face of ongoing regional challenges, and to meet the sizeable investment needs of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Support from the international community to address the repercussions of the Syria crisis will continue to be an important element in the means of implementation of the SDGs. Increased support in the form of grants and concessional finance was committed in 2016 to Jordan as part of the Jordan Compact, with the funding attracted fulfilling approximately 61% of the requested needs for that year as outlined in the Jordan Response Plan for 2016. This represents a vast improvement compared to prior commitments that fulfilled just 33% of funding needs in previous years.
The launch of the Concessional Financing Facility represents another breakthrough developed in response to Jordanis call for the consideration of innovative financing schemes for upper-middle income countries, to support countries like Jordan to cope with the effect of the Syria crisis on its national economy. Jordan was also the first country in the Middle East and North Africa region to join the Sustainable Development Investment Partnership, an initiative managed by the Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development and the World Economic Forum to address specific financial challenges to projects in the region, and committed to mobilizing USD100 Billion in blended finance for sustainable and resilient infrastructure. 
In order to improve the impact of public investment management (PIM), the government has also developed a \0xECPIM Action Plan (2016-2018) for the formulation, preparation and evaluation of projects to ensure an efficient investment process, maximize the expected return on investment projects and ensure their strong contribution to sustainable development in the country. 
The Government of Jordan and the UN Country Team are on track to become the first formal \0xEBDelivering as Onei (DaO) country in the Arab region, representing a strategic shift in its upcoming 2018-2022 programme cycle. This will ensure better agility and coordination among actors, and within the UN system in supporting SDG realization. 
Furthermore, UN agencies have developed a joint strategic approach for their partnership with the Government of Jordan to achieve the 2030 Agenda in 2016-2017. The priority areas for cooperation focused on:
1- Mainstreaming the SDGs into national plans and monitoring systems;
2- Capacity development for effective implementation and data collection/monitoring; 	3- Advocacy and awareness-raising.
Jordan will also pursue longer-term cooperation and funding mechanisms with other bilateral and multilateral donors.   
5.2  CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT GAPS AND NEEDS INCLUDING SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY GAPS
In addition to financial resources, a robust capacity-development approach will be instrumental in ensuring an efficient and effective implementation of the SDGs. This was raised in the consultations held for the purposes of this VNR; all MGOs highlighted the importance of a systematic approach to develop capacity across a number of priority areas to achieve the SDGs. These include:
- Enhancing the capacities of the national statistical system;
- Mainstreaming the SDGs into national development and sub-national plans; 
- SDG costing; 
- Coordination mechanisms;
- Technical capacities to achieve the goals;  	- Monitoring and evaluation.
Science, technology and innovation will also play an important role in the attainment of the SDGs. Earlier national efforts in this regard led to the identification of scientific research priorities for the years 20112020 across 14 different development sectors.
The current National Policy and Strategy for Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) (2013-2017) is currently under review, and preparations are underway to develop new policies and strategies based on lessons learnt. This provides a window of opportunity to map the current science, technology, and innovation gaps based upon the overall framework of the SDGs, in order to ensure that future strategies are fully aligned and conducive to accelerating their achievement. 
A detailed plan will be developed surrounding the role of academia and the STI sector in achieving the SDGs. The plan will be informed by the recommendations of key global \0xECTechnology Facilitating Mechanisms to encourage further collaboration between the science and technology community and policymakers.
5.3   PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS  
Partnership between the public and private sectors (PPP) is an important component of sustainable development for Jordan as a means of reaching high quality standards, and promoting transparency and accountability. PPP will also ensure that projects are efficiently managed to achieve social and economic gains and positively reflect on the standard of living of citizens in terms of the quality of services provided or job opportunities created.
Since the beginning of the millennium, Jordan has placed great attention on strengthening its PPP framework given the private sectoris fundamental role in achieving economic, social and environmental development. Jordan has taken strides in this area, adopting a number of reforms aimed at creating the right environment for the private sector to compete, especially in infrastructure and services projects. Some legislation was amended, and a number of public institutions were restructured and modified 
Part 5 - MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION
into independent institutions entrusted with organizing and supervising certain sectors while allowing a greater role for the private sector.  Within this endeavour, the Government was keen to separate the roles among policy makers, regulators, and service providers, starting with partnerships in the telecommunications, energy, transport and water sectors.
However, Jordan faces great challenges in providing adequate infrastructure to all its development sectors and sustaining them. Given that investment in infrastructure dominates the largest share of public spending, significant further funding is required to cover such costs.
The country has taken several steps towards reform that will serve to strengthen partnership with the private sector, as a key partner in building and operating infrastructure projects and services. These steps include:
\0xEF Providing a legal framework to govern private-public partnerships, issuing a PPP Law and establishing a PPP Unit in the MOF to facilitate and coordinate this process;
\0xEF Developing capacity, particularly in the area of project prioritization and directing investment towards these, to achieve the greatest economic and social returns;
\0xEF Providing an enabling environment for the private sector to invest in infrastructure partnership projects;
\0xEF Providing an institutional framework to support the creation of strong and sustainable institutions;
\0xEF Supporting banks to provide financing to the private sector, especially in small and medium enterprises;
\0xEF Providing incentives to the private sector to enter into partnership projects;
\0xEF Providing capacity development for institutions and their associated human resources to ensure their readiness to cooperate with the private sector in the implementation of partnership projects and to ensure an accelerated pace of implementation.
In the coming five years and within the framework of the Economic Growth Plan in Jordan, 23 projects for partnership with the private sector have been identified across various development sectors at a cost of approximately USD 14 billion, to be further diversified and increased in the years to come. This builds on Jordanis strong track record, succeeding in packaging over USD10 billion over the past decade of PPP projects in electricity generation, renewable energy, water, transport, waste water treatment, municipal services, urban development and other infrastructure. 
Beginning in 2018, Jordan will implement a framework for PIM by identifying and implementing partnership projects on a competitive basis, assessing factors such as cost, benefit, efficiency, financing methods as some of the criteria for project financing, with the aim of merging the economic advantages of the private sector with the social concerns of the public sector for the prosperity of both. The PIM framework will be utilized to maximize implementing capital expenditure projects under the budget via PPP schemes of the private sector with the social concerns of the public sector for the prosperity of both.?


6. CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS 
The early implementation of the 2030 Agenda has greatly benefitted from strong political will and support at the highest level, the facilitating policy environment, streamlined institutional mechanisms, building on the successful experience gained during the implementations of the MDGs.
Jordan begins this journey with great challenges as the country faces losing its development gains due to the continuing regional instabilities, the pressures exerted on the countryis infrastructure and services, and the continuous urgency to seek predictable long-term funding.
A number of challenges, lessons learnt and key recommendations from the consultations conducted as part of the review process emerged that will help shape the Roadmap for SDG realization in the coming years:
\0xEF The adverse effect of the regional instabilities: The main challenge highlighted by all public institutions and MGOs was the impact of the Syria crisis on achieving the SDGs. While every effort has been made to appropriately address this challenge, it remains a major threat to safeguarding hard-won development gains and furthering future achievements;
\0xEF Criticality of financing for development: this is especially the case in light of the declines in local revenues, the increasing budget deficit which reached 10% of the GDP a couple of years ago,an increase in external and internal public debt which reached 95% of the GDP in 2016, and a decline in capital expenditures. All of these factors seriously threaten the attainment of the SDGs.  As a result, a national economic and fiscal reform programme is under way coupled with successive IMF adjustment programs which resulted in bringing the deficit back to under 3% of the GDP and have stabilized the rise in debt to GDP, helping to bring it down over the next few years. This in addition to the implementation of PIM framework designed to accelerate the implementation of capital expenditure projects through PPP schemes;
\0xEF The decrease of foreign trade and exports as a result of the instabilities in the region;
\0xEF The importance of a genuine partnership and increased role for the private sector;
\0xEF The urgency of strong coordination among all government and private institutions to ensure  a cumulative effect rather than a duplication of efforts; 
\0xEF The importance of quality technical assistance and capacity-development: This extends across all line ministries and MGOs using innovative approaches and tools, to avoid a sectoral, \0xECbusiness-as-usual approach in achieving the SDGs; 
\0xEF The need for increased focus on promoting ownership and awareness raising about the SDGs: The awareness raising activities conducted by the Government and MGOs related to the SDGs can be further expanded by agreeing upon nationally endorsed resources that can be tailored to each specific audience;
\0xEF The need to build the capacities of the national statistical system: this is a crucial step to  accommodating new roles in data gathering and quality assurance envisaged for the DOS and other partners;
\0xEF The remaining shortage of indicators available to monitor the SDGs; a detailed plan is required to systematically increase the number of indicators classified as Tier I. Based on initial mapping exercises, more than half of the SDG indicators are still categorized as Tier II and Tier III indicators, a situation which should improve over the last years;
\0xEF A greater engagement in SDG implementation at the sub-national level: The efforts and initiatives to institutionalize ownership of the SDGs are focused primarily in the capital and major cities. National and sub-national plans should be put in place to roll-out the SDG Roadmap at the governorate level to reach all localities in the country, and all people, especially youth. While the capacities of local authorities should be developed to move from service provision, to a sustainable development perspective, guided by the 2030 Agenda;
\0xEF The capitalization on the many successes achieved during the MDG period  should not be forgotten: The successes in building on national planning and institutional frameworks achieved during the MDG implementation should continue and be further elaborated upon in realizing the SDGs; 
In the coming years, the Government will focus on strengthening coordination at all levels, on mainstreaming the 2030 Agenda in its current and future EDPs and JRPs, and also on increasing the availability of data for monitoring and evaluation.  
Moving forward, the Roadmap will be further refined to coordinate the work of different national and international entities working on the implementation and monitoring of the 2030 Agenda. The Roadmap will be expanded and detailed into a national workplan on SDG implementation and monitoring that will focus on the following elements: 
1- Raising awareness of the 2030 Agenda (goals, targets, indicators and means of implementation): 
\0xEF Finalizing the draft SDG Communication Strategy currently being developed; 
 
\0xEF Developing different approaches and tools for rights-based awareness raising to reach different target audiences: civil society organizations, the private sector, youth, women, volunteers, students, academia, parliamentarians, municipal councils through written and visual material, workshops, panel discussions, social media and simulation models;
 
\0xEF Developing Information Communication Technology based awareness raising platforms on the SDGs that target youth and other MGOs;
 
\0xEF Raising awareness of the important role of volunteers in SDG implementation.
2- Prioritization and mapping of goals, targets and indicators with national planning frameworks:
\0xEF  Holding regular technical meetings and reviews to agree on baselines and targets for all indicators; \0xEF  Building national capacities in conducting gap analyses to identify gaps in available indicators.
3- Mainstreaming within national plans:
\0xEF Developing national capacities in mainstreaming the SDGs;
 
\0xEF Establishing a team of national certified trainers to provide continuous training in mainstreaming the SDGs in the current and future EDPs and sectoral plans, taking into consideration the economic, social and environmental elements of sustainable development and their interconnectedness;
 
\0xEF Conducting training for working groups and focal points who will be developing future EDPs.
4- Mainstreaming into sub-national plans:
\0xEF Developing and endorsing selection criteria for the roll-out of mainstreaming of the SDGs at the governorate level (starting with two governorates);
 
\0xEF Establishing local teams of trainers per governorate dedicated to mainstreaming the SDGs into governorate level plans; 
\0xEF Conducting training for Government and NGO staff involved in governorates development programmes on SDG mainstreaming, implementation and monitoring.
5- Strengthening national statistical systems and availability of data:
\0xEF Finalizing the mapping of national and sub-national SDG indicators;
 
\0xEF Identifying the data producing organizations for the indicators; 
 
\0xEF Identifying further data gaps;
 
\0xEF Providing technical support to the DOS to ensure that the National Statistical Strategy currently being developed addresses the data gaps in SDG indicators and focuses on optimal use of administrative records;
\0xEF Providing technical assistance to DOS to map all routine surveys, e.g., the Demographic and Health Surveys, Household Income and Expenditure Surveys, to name a few, and utilizing these to try to close data gaps related to the SDGs;
\0xEF Providing technical support to DOS and related institutions to develop new surveys and routine data systems to ensure the availability of missing data (including disaggregated data) from DOS or other data providers; 
\0xEF Provide technical assistance to DOS in data quality assurance.
6- Gender mainstreaming:
\0xEF Continuing to mainstream gender in all national development plans in-line with the SDGs, mapping of gender indicator gaps and establishment of a gender database;
\0xEF Supporting the JNCW to coordinate NGO efforts and develop capacities in gender mainstreaming, monitoring and awareness-raising on gender and the SDGs.
7- Further strengthening institutional mechanisms:
\0xEF Continuing to use and adapt existing frameworks to ensure involvement of related Government and MGOs in planning, implementing and monitoring of SDGs within national development planning;
\0xEF Developing strategies to further increase the private sectoris active participation and engagement in existing institutional mechanisms;
\0xEF Conducting a comprehensive mapping of all legislations related to the achievement of the SDGs and developing a plan of action for legislative change as needed;
\0xEF Establishing a coordination mechanism between the UN Country Team and the Government to prepare the operational plan for the realization of the SDGs. 
 
8- SDG Costing:
\0xEF Providing technical assistance to develop an econometric model based on the existing situation and future projections to calculate the cost of achieving the SDGs in line with national priorities; 
 
\0xEF Establishing a core team of trainers in SDG costing;
\0xEF Develop capacities in costing (including gender responsive costing) at the national and sub-national levels and institutionalization within national planning mechanisms.
9- Financing: 
\0xEF Continuing to direct capital funding towards achieving comprehensive and sustainable development through the funding of national plans;
 
\0xEF Strengthening partnerships with the private sector given their important role in implementing economically and socially viable strategic projects; 
\0xEF Developing the business and investment environment to encourage local and foreign investments, especially since Jordan enjoys a competitive advantage in this field, in addition to legislation, privileges and incentives;
\0xEF Strengthening the competitiveness of Jordanian products in international markets and increasing the growth of national exports by opening new markets and strengthening the rules of origin in international agreements, while giving Jordan a competitive edge;
 
\0xEF Promoting regional cooperation in the areas of trade, transport, water and energy, leading to economic and social development without harming the environment;
\0xEF Promoting North-South and South-South cooperation among countries, especially as Jordan enjoys a strategic position between Asia, Africa and Europe;
\0xEF Securing funding for the national plan to reduce emissions included in the submission made  at the Paris Climate Change Conference, an ambitious plan that makes a global contribution to climate change mitigation;
\0xEF Strengthening the framework of corporate social responsibility with the private sector.
10- Enhancing monitoring and evaluation systems:
\0xEF Establishing a national monitoring system and dashboard on SDG indicators and achievements on the MOPIC website available for all; 
\0xEF Preparing annual progress reports and national progress reports every four years;
\0xEF Supporting innovative pilot initiatives, especially with youth, to cover data gaps using social media and new scientific research techniques;
\0xEF Strengthening the role of academia, NGOs, CSOs and other MGOs in surveys and data gathering;
\0xEF Development of interactive websites to facilitate active citizen engagement in SDG implementation and monitoring; for example, through open forums and opinion polls on government websites.

11- Capacity development:  
\0xEF Supporting initiatives that aim to enhance cooperation with developed economies in the fields of knowledge transfer and technology for the achievement of the 2030 Agenda;
\0xEF Developing national training material tailored to different audiences and focused on the SDGs and each personis role in the achievement of them;
\0xEF Establishing a national certified team of trainers who are able to deliver training on the SDGs, raising awareness, mainstreaming in national plans and sub- national plans, and monitoring and tracking their progress. Such training and orientation should include all MGOs and not be limited to Government as the private sector must be especially involved;
\0xEF Develop capacities in planning, mainstreaming and localizing the SDGs and in gender mainstreaming;
\0xEF Building the capacity of VIO to focus on quality versus the quantity of volunteers engaged in SDG implementation and monitoring.