
Executive Summary 
The preparation of this Voluntary Review Report was coordinated by the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, which is mandated to coordinate the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Kenya. The SDGs coordinating department, within the Ministry of Devolution and Planning is the focal point and was supported by the SDGs Inter-Agency Technical Committee (IATC), comprising of officers from key government Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs), United Nations Agencies, Civil Society and the Private Sector. To ensure wider consultation, umbrella bodies held consultations with their members, received inputs and prepared reports which formed the basis of this report. The report benefited from internal reviews from the Ministry of Devolution and Planning and subjected to stakeholder validation.  
 
The 2030 Agenda finds Kenya at vantage point as it builds on the lessons learnt and foundations laid by the MDGs. Further to this, the agenda was adopted while Kenya was implementing its long-term economic blueprint for accelerating transformation of the country into a rapidly industrializing middle-income nation by the year 2030. A closer look indicates that the Kenya Vision 2030 is well aligned to the global development framework and its implementation is directly linked towards achieving the SDGs. The time frame of the Vision coincides with the timeframe for the SDGs.  
 
To hit the road running, the country developed the SDGs road map covering seven broad areas that will guide the transition process from MDGs to SDGs. It identifies the actions that require to be undertaken to position the country on the fastest and most reliable trajectory possible to achieve the SDGs. The seven areas are; mapping of stakeholders and establishing partnerships, advocacy and sensitization, domestication/localization, mainstreaming and accelerating implementation, resource mobilization, tracking and reporting and capacity building. It was developed through a consultative process with inputs from government, both the national and sub national, Civil Society Organization, development partners including the United Nations, among others. 
Towards domestication and localization of SDGs, in addition to the SDGs road map, Kenya has undertaken a number of initiatives which includes mapping the SDGs with Vision 2030, MDGs End Term Report, setting up institutional framework, capacity building, advocacy and awareness creation, mainstreaming SDGs in policy and planning including the performance contracts and Strategic Plans on Ministries, Departments and Agencies and indicator mapping among others. This has been done with engagement of the stakeholders. Kenya has also set the baseline data for most of the indicators to be between 2009 and 2014, depending on the frequency of data collection. However, inadequate baseline data on some of the indicators has proved a challenge in measuring progress on implementation of the SDGs. 
 
Since the adoption of the SDGs, Kenya has made progress in the implementation of the SDGs. From January 2016, Kenya has realized several milestones towards ending hunger and poverty in all its forms. Poverty levels in Kenya are currently 45.2 percent which is a decrease from the 2007 level of 46.8 percent and several poverty alleviation initiatives are being undertaken. The National Social Safety Net programme (NSNP) whose objective is to improve the well-being of and increase resilience among specific vulnerable groups in Kenya is one of the major government initiatives to help meet the SDG sand therefore the poverty rate is likely to have dropped when the next estimation is conducted.  
 
In its commitment ensure that no one is left behind, the Government has been and will continue to implement a number of social protection (SP) programmes.  Such programs and  interventions are implemented by different stakeholders that include Government ministries and agencies, the private sector, communities, households, and other non-state actors. They include constitutionally created Equalization Fund provision of free primary school education and tuition free secondary school as well the expansion of Technical and Vocational Educational Training (TVET) institutions to the village level, Women Enterprise Fund, Youth Enterprise Development Fund, UWEZO (Ability) Fund, Procurement Preferences and Reservations (30 per cent affirmative action policy for women, youth and persons with disabilities) in public procurement, National Youth Services Capacity Building Initiatives and the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project (KYEP). These programmes aim at addressing the plight of the less disadvantaged in society, combat poverty, and promote equity. 
 
Ensuring healthy lives and wellbeing for all at all ages is one of the goals that form part of the unfinished business of the MDGs.  Although significant progress has been made, indicators such as maternal mortality rate, under- five mortality rate and neonatal mortality rate and the HIV incidence rate have not been on track. A wide range of initiatives are strengthening service delivery and improving health outcomes such as enhanced investments in  human resource for health, , the equipment leasing strategy, HIV related stigma reduction initiative and expanded treatment coverage. 
 
One of the key focus in the health sector is to provide health insurance cover to allow access to comprehensive health care for all including the vulnerable persons, orphans and the elderly. As a result, the government has been expanding the benefit package National Health Insurance Scheme to include in-patient and out-patient cover, major and minor surgeries, cardiac conditions and chronic illness, comprehensive cover for civil servants and disciplined forces and new packages related to addressing non-communicable conditions and instituting strategies to enroll more members. This has resulted in improved access to high quality comprehensive health care at subsidized costs and enhanced access to healthcare by Kenyans particularly the vulnerable segments of the society. 
 
To address the maternal and child health, a number of innovative interventions are being implemented. One such intervention is Beyond Zero campaign an initiative of H.E. First Lady, Mrs. Margaret Kenyatta which aims to end preventable deaths among women and children and give new impetus to fight against HIV through policy prioritization, resource allocation and improved service delivery. The campaign seeks to leverage on the convening power of the First Lady for strengthening existing health and community systems, mobilizing the contributions of private and public sectors and development partners, catalyzing innovation and accelerating action by stakeholders and political leaders for the full implementation of Kenyais HIV, maternal and child health commitments. 
 
At the sub national level, the West Pokot sub national Government has started KIRORs. This is a home outside their home and a home outside the health facility. Expectant mothers move to KIROR near a health facility a few days to their expected day of delivery and are monitored during labour by the health personnel at the health facility thereby reducing congestion at the health facility while at the same time getting prompt services of a qualified personnel during delivery. The national HIV response has been a leading example in establishing an inclusive response, fostering multi-sectoral partnerships and pursuing innovative approaches. 
 
In the education sector, Kenya has embraced various policies, strategies, guidelines and programmes geared towards the goal which has resulted in commendable progress in a number of areas. The primary schools enrolment and completion rate has increased and the transition rate from primary to secondary schools has also gone up. Special initiatives have also been undertaken to enhance access to education by the vulnerable including disadvantaged and female students. .Reforms are also being undertaken in the educational system to align it with the countryis development goals and evolving market demands. 
 
For many years now the government has empowered women which is critical in effectively combating poverty, hunger and disease in the country and also a way to stimulate development and achievement of the other SDGs In pursuit of this goal, the government has undertaken initiatives aimed at promoting gender equality and empowerment of women with the aim of ensuring equal access, control and resource distribution to improve livelihood for the marginalized categories of people, including women, people with disability (PWDs).  
 
In Kenya access to safe, adequate and reliable water supply is one of the central indicators of socio-economic development. The percentage of population using safely managed drinking water services was 66.9 percent as at 2014 which implies that a large proportion of Kenyans have no access to sources of drinking water which are safe and reliable. Some of the initiatives in this area include construction and expansion of water supply schemes in urban and rural areas and; devolution of water provision services to the sub national governments to improve on efficiency and effectiveness.  
 
The Nairobi Water and Sewerage Company has installed water ATMs enabling city residents living in informal settlements to access quality water affordably. The ATMs use AQtap technology and the residents pay for water using mobile technology.  This has reduced the cost of water to the community as well as improved revenue collection by the company. 
 
Development of the energy sector is critical if Kenya is to achieve the Kenya Vision 2030 and become a newly industrializing, middle income country. The goal of the energy sector is to ensure that every Kenyan has access to electricity. To achieve this, about 5.95 million households have been connected to electricity supply which is 144 percent increase in three years resulting in 33 million or 65 percent access to electricity. During the same period, 23,337 or 97 percent public primary schools were connected to electricity which is an increase of 170 percent. The increase in electricity connections has positive an impact on socio-economic development including job creation, growth of industries, enhances security of lives and property and  enhances implementation of Digital Literacy Programme thereby improving the quality of education. Kenya is building the largest wind farm in Africa, the Lake Turkana Wind Power Consortium (LTWP). It aims to provide 300 MW of low-cost electrical power.  
 
Kenya recognizes the critical role of infrastructure, industrialization and innovation in the achievement of the Kenya vision 2030. To enhance connectivity, trade and security in South Sudan and Ethiopia, Kenya is currently developing the northern trade route. The Lamu Port South Sudan Ethiopia Transport (LAPSSET) Corridor Project is the largest integrated transformative infrastructure project in Africa.  The Project aims at opening up northern Kenya and providing a reliable transport corridor to Ethiopia, South Sudan and to some extent Uganda. 
 
The acreage under Government forest plantation expanded slightly while the total mineral output increased by 9.5 per cent in 2016. On building resilient infrastructure to promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization, passenger and freight volumes have continued to increase since 2014. Likewise the proportion of population covered by mobile network has continued to increase and is among the highest in the developing world.  
 
Kenya has also been active at the regional level to address the SDGs. Kenya has participated in Somalia Peace Keeping Missions; signed treaties on cultural exchange programmes with 51 countries hosting Kenya Missions and is the chair of Inter-Country Quality Nodes on peace education in Africa. 
 
Lessons learnt from MDGs implementation have shown that strong partnerships and collaboration amongst stakeholders are critical in the successful implementation of the SDGs. One important step that has been undertaken is the mapping of all relevant stakeholders who will be involved in the implementation of the SDGs.  This will involve renegotiation of the roles, responsibilities and relationships between the different stakeholders and ensure a strong collaboration and creation of synergies which are necessary in implementation of the SDGs.  
 
In the process of implementing the goals, Kenya faces a number of challenges which include inadequate disaggregated data, high stakeholder expectations and inadequate funding for SDGs. Moving forward, a number of activities will be undertaken including intensified awareness creation and capacity building, mainstreaming of SDGs into the third MTP (MTP III), second generation County Integrated Development Plans and public institutions strategic plans; Review the National Statistical System (NSS) in light of the SDGs, Enhancing multi- stakeholder participation in the SDGs process and enhanced Resource mobilization. 
 
Building on the gains of the MDGs period, the lessons learnt and the experience gained over the time, there is renewed confidence among stakeholders and citizens on the preparedness of the country to tackle the SDGs. The overwhelming interest by the Private Sector has given a shot in the arm to the SDGs campaign and put the country firmly on track to attain the targets and the indicators. 
 
	1.0 	INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
 
Kenya being a member of the United Nations participated in the SDGs processes at national, regional and global levels including during the adoption of the SDGs agenda. Since adoption of the Agenda 2030, the Government of Kenya, non-state actors and development partners have committed to the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the agenda. 
 
The agenda was adopted when Kenya was already implementing its long term Economic blueprint for accelerating transformation of the country into a rapidly industrializing middle income nation by the year 2030. The Kenya Vision 2030 comprising of three key pillars; Economic, Social and Political provides the frameworks for the integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.  
 
The Economic Pillar aims to achieve and sustain an average economic growth rate of 10 percent per annum until 2030. The Social Pillar seeks to build a just and cohesive society with social equity in a clean and secure environment. The Political Pillar aims to realize a democratic political system founded on issue-based politics that respects the rule of law, and protects the rights and freedoms of every individual in Kenyan society.   
 
The Pillars are anchored on enablers and macro or the foundations.  The enablers consist of Infrastructure; Information and Communications Technology (ICT); Science, Technology and Innovation (STI); Land Reforms; Public Sector Reforms; Labour and Employment; National Values and Ethics; Ending Drought Emergencies (EDE); Security; Peace Building and Conflict Resolution.  
 
The Vision outlines flagship projects in each sector.  To enhance value addition and move the economy along the value chain, as outlined in the Vision 2030, Kenya is focusing on the following seven key sectors with potential to deliver 10% economic growth per annum: Tourism; Agriculture (Agro-processing); Wholesale & Retail trade; Manufacturing; IT enabled services/Business Process Outsourcing; Financial Services and Oil, Gas & Mineral resources. For social development and to meet the basic needs of its people Kenya is investing in its people  by undertaking transformation in 6 key social sectors: Education and Training; Health including HIV and AIDS; Water and Sanitation; Environment; Housing and Urbanization; Gender, Youth and Vulnerable groups while Political Pillar is focussed on Moving to the Future as one Nation. 
 
To start the implementation of the SDGs in Kenya, it was found necessary to establish the extent to which the SDGs converge with Kenyais own development objectives as set out in the Kenya Vision 2030 and therefore identify which SDGs are relevant to Kenyais development context. This was done by mapping each of the 17 goals with Vision 2030 within the second Medium Term Plan. The mapping indicates that the Kenya Vision 2030 is well aligned to the global development framework and its implementation is directly linked towards achieving both Vision 2030 and SDGs and is indeed a progressive process with goals and milestones that will be achieved over time. 
 
The time-frame of the Vision coincides with the timeframe for the SDGs. This is an opportunity for Kenya as progress towards the national priorities as spelt out in the Vision could be matched with progress towards the SDGs. The vision is implemented at both the national and sub national levels through a five year Medium Term Plan and County Integrated Development Plans respectively. The SDGs will be mainstreamed at these two levels. 
 
Kenya acknowledges that development is primarily about people and therefore is adopting a human rights-based approach to development. In 2010, a new Constitution was endorsed which has a comprehensive Bill of Rights which sets out both the rights extending to all individuals and those of specific groups, including children, youth and persons with disabilities. Specifically, the right to the highest attainable standard of health, education, accessible and adequate housing and water and sanitation, as well as the right to food are all guaranteed in the 
Constitution as enforceable rights. Chapter four on the bill of rights clearly articulates that \0xECThe purpose of recognizing and protecting human rights and fundamental freedoms is to preserve the dignity of individuals and communities and to promote social justice and the realization of the potential of all human beings.  
Further, the Constitution also establishes that any treaty ratified by Kenya will form part of national law.  As a result, the implementation of the new constitution will fast tract the achievement of the the SDGs. 
The Constitution adopted a devolved system of government.  The country is now divided into 47 counties whose governments are now responsible for certain functions in such areas as agriculture, health, early childhood education, water and sanitation services, markets, county public works among others. Kenya has therefore aligned itself to the global development agenda. For success, the country will go beyond the current  sectoral approach to development and follow an integrated approach, and also ensure that local-national linkages are harmonized to ensure that the SDGs are operationalized at all levels. 
 
In line with the outcome document of the United Nations Summit for the Sustainable development (paragraph 79) which encourages member states to \0xECconduct regular and inclusive reviews of progress at the national and sub-national levels which are country-led and countrydriven, Kenya has volunteered to participate in the 2017 High Level Political Forum and present its Voluntary National Reviews (VNRs) in order to share Kenyais experience in the implementation of the SDGs two years after adoption. The overall objective of this review is to assess the progress made in the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals for purpose of continued policy planning and implementation. The specific objectives are; share experiences in the transition from the MDGs to SDGs, to review progress and status on SDGs implementation; highlight progress and initiatives related to eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity to ensure no one is left behind; identify best practices, lessons learnt, emerging issues and areas that would need support in the implementation of the SDGs; identify challenges and actions being undertaken to address the gaps and challenges.  
 
The report has addressed the main components of the Secretary-Generalis proposed voluntary common reporting guidelines while at the same time adapting them according to  our national preferences and to the early stage of implementation of the 2030 Agenda. It is organized into the following sections.  Section II present the methodology that was used to prepare the report Section III discusses the enabling environment covering the actions taken to create ownership of the SDGs, incorporation of the SDGs into our planning frameworks, and the institutional framework for domestication of the SDGs. The initiatives in place targeting the poor and vulnerable are covered in section IV The progress in the implementation of the SDGs is covered in section V while section VI cover highlights the monitoring and evaluation mechanisms. Section VII highlights key challenges and finally the next steps are covered in section VIII. The last part of the report is the annex. 
 

2.0 	METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS FOR PREPARATION OF THE  	REVIEW 
 
The coordination of the review was done by the Ministry of Devolution and Planning which is mandated to coordinate the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Kenya. The SDGs Coordination Department within the Ministry of Devolution is the focal point and was supported by an Inter-Agency Technical Committee (IATC), comprising of officers from key government Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs, civil society organizations and private sector.  
 
The review mainly covers the early action undertaken to domesticate the SDGs, progress made in the implementation of all the 17 SDGs, challenges and the next steps. It drew heavily from inputs prepared by different stakeholders, based on their relevant goals and targets. These inputs focused on specific areas as guided by the SDGs coordinating department but not limited to; 
 
i. The extent of ownership creation on the SDGs; 
ii. The extent to which Kenyais planning frameworks have incorporated the SDGs; 
iii. The level of inclusion of economic, social and environmental dimensions in SDGs implementation; 
iv. Progress  and status on SDGs targets and indicators;  
v. Best practices, lessons learned and emerging issues;  
vi. Challenges facing the country in implementing the SDGs; and 
vii. Any other relevant information relating to SDGs 
 
Recognizing the critical role played by the stakeholders in the SDGs process, the review was highly consultative involving government Ministries, Departments, Agencies (MDAs); sub national governments; development partners; Civil Society Organizations (CSOs); special groups including youth and persons with disabilities, and the private sector in order to increase ownership in the process. This involved the engagement of representatives from these stakeholders and integration of their inputs to form the Voluntary National Report (VNR). The inputs from these stakeholders were consolidated to produce this report. 
 
The first critical step involved the preparation of key timelines and deliverables towards the Voluntary National Report (VNR). This was followed by the preparation of data/information collection templates/tools, targeting specific stakeholders based on goals, targets and their relevance to each stakeholder. The preparation of the tools drew heavily from the Voluntary Common Reporting Guidelines, as contained in the Secretary Generalis Report. This was spearheaded by an internal committee within the Ministry of Devolution and Planning. The committee comprised of three departments namely the SDGs Coordinating Department, Monitoring and Evaluation Department and Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. 
 
The tools were then shared with stakeholders with a deadline for submission. It should be noted that the entry point for the private sector, CSOs, sub national governments, youth and persons with disabilities was their umbrella bodies for ownership and ease of follow-up. These included Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA), SDGs Kenya Forum, the Council of 
Governors (CoG), National Youth Council and Association of Persons Living with Disability.  
The umbrella bodies held consultations with their members, and prepared reports which formed the basis for this report. 
 
A drafting team comprising of the SDGs Coordinating Department, Inter Agency Technical Committee, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), United Nations Country Team on SDGs, representatives from the civil society, consolidated the inputs from various stakeholders to produce a first draft. 
 
The report benefited from internal reviews from the Ministry of Devolution and Planning which was later shared with stakeholders for their inputs. A validation workshop was held involving various stakeholders.  All the comments received in these processes, were to a large extent incorporated to form the final report.  
 
The review process was spearheaded by the government with both financial and technical support from the UN country office and civil society organizations.  The UN country office collaborated with the government in organizing working retreats to prepare the report while the civil society supported the printing of the report. 
 
The following limitations were identified during review process; 
 
i. Absence of baseline data for some of the indicators affected monitoring their progress;  
ii. Inadequate capacity on SDGs implementation, monitoring and reporting affected the adequacy of stakeholder submissions; 
iii. No clear modalities of engaging the large number of stakeholders in the preparatory process; and 
iv. Consolidation of  inputs from stakeholders with different views into one report that conforms to the common reporting guidelines 
 
	3.0 	POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMENT 
 
	3.1 	Creating Ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals 
 
Kenya has been at the center of the Agenda 2030 process. Before the expiry of the MDGs period, there was considerable interest in assessing the goals and considering the future of development goals after 2015. This resulted in consultations at international, national and subnational levels to discuss the future development framework. Kenya held consultations both national and sub-national levels which were intended to foster an inclusive multi-stakeholder process and advocate for a Post-2015 development agenda informed by national and local priorities. 
The stakeholders were drawn from both levels of government, Civil Society Organizations, Non-Governmental Organizations, private sector and academia. At the sub national levels the forum included opinion leaders, elected leaders, community based organizations and representatives of the private sector. Finally a national consultation forum on the Post 2015 Development Agenda was held to synthesize the various suggestions and recommendation realized from the various forums. The government through the Ministry of Devolution and Planning continued to hold internal consultations in order to take stock of the MDGs process create awareness on the new agenda and map out strategies on how to push the new agenda forward. 
The second national conference was held in February 2015, and aimed at discussing on how to move the agenda forward. The conference involved key stakeholders that included government ministries, the private sector, parastatals, civil society organizations, academia, foundations, research institutions, development partners and various experts from different sectors The objectives of the forum were; to get a highlight of where Kenya is in the Post 2015 Development Agenda process; to share experiences in the implementation of the MDGs including lessons learnt to guide the new development agenda; and to discuss the challenges ahead as we move to the new agenda on Sustainable Development Goals. The expected outcomes included; strategies on how to move the agenda forward; and also come up with concrete actions that can be implemented.  
 
The conference came up with recommendations that included; the need to put in place a synergistic framework of means of implementation, including financing, technology and investments in sustainable development capacities. It also recommended  the need for embracing a culture of shared responsibilities in order to ensure promises are turned into actions as well as having a monitoring system that include all stakeholders and which  is based on enhanced statistical capacities and tapping into potential of new and non-traditional data sources.  
This was followed by a CSOs forum organized by the government in September 2015. The main objective of the workshop was to share experiences on implementation of MDGs and sensitize stakeholders on the Post 2015 Development Agenda. The forum also discussed the role of stakeholders in implementation of SDGs and, financing modalities. The participants comprised Civil Society Organizations, Development Partners and Government Ministries. The forum emphasized the need to ensure that all stakeholders are sensitized using appropriate communication channels as well as ensuring involvement of the parliament. It also recommended the need to minimize time taken in publicity and awareness creation so as to leave room for interventions. These consultations culminated into a National  Position on the Post 2015, which was presented to both the African Union Commission and the United Nations.  
 
In order to ensure that the 2030 agenda benefits from the experience gained during the MDGs period, the Government undertook a study covering the period 2000-2015 to assess the progress made in achievements of the MDGs, document the experiences, challenges and lessons learnt during the implementation as well as assessing the impact created since they were adopted by the Government of Kenya in 2002. In addition, the study also mapped out strategies on how best to proceed to ensure a successful implementation of the lagging MDGs and transitioning to the SDGs, including identifying risks, challenges mitigation measures and provide the foundation for the implementation of the agenda 2030. The report was disseminated to the stakeholders. 
 
Based on the recommendations of the stakeholdersi fora and the study report, the SDGs Road Map was prepared through a consultative process involving all key stakeholders which contributed to awareness creation. The purpose of this strategy was to identify in advance the actions that require to be undertaken to position the country to take the fastest and most reliable trajectory possible to achieve the SDGs.  The road map focuses on milestones crucial to the successful take off of the SDGs and effective transition from MDGs to SDGs.  
 
The strategy focuses on the following seven broad areas that will guide the transition process in Kenya; mapping of stakeholders and establishing partnerships, advocacy and sensitization, domestication/localization, mainstreaming and accelerating implementation, resource mobilization, and capacity building.    The road map has been shared with the stakeholders as it will guide them in the implementation of the SDGs. The launch of the SDGs in Kenya on 14th September 2016 was aimed at awareness creation and rallies the stakeholders behind the implementation of the agenda. The launch drew participants from all stakeholders including those from the National and devolved units. The road map has also been shared widely. 
 
Since the adoption of the SDGs, the government has placed emphasis on advocacy and awareness creation. The government has sensitized senior management in the civil service. At the same time key staffs in all the six Regional Development Authorities have been sensitized on the SDGs. The expectation was that since these Authorities are based in the rural areas and therefore in close contact with the communities they will take the SDGs messages to the lower levels.  Further the Coalition of Civil Society on SDGs in collaboration with the government has been undertaking community outreach programmes at the community level to sensitize them on the Agenda 2030.  The government has also been invited to forums organized by various institutions including Universities, Faith Based Organizations and civil society organization to sensitize them on the SDGs. 
 
To enhance communication and understanding of the SDGs, the government has also been producing and disseminating IEC materials on SDGs. This has been done in collaboration with UNDP country office and the civil society organizations. There has been the operationalization of social media communication platforms including Facebook and WhatsApp which act as means of dissemination of SDGs to the public to enhance publicity and support. This is a continuous activity. 
To support the rolling out of the activities spelt out in the Road Map, an Inter Agency Technical Working Group was established in early 2015. This Working Group (WG) comprises of key ministries in the implementation of the SDGs, Kenya National Bureau of Statistics and National Council for Population and Development, civil society and the private sector. The main mandate of this WG is to spearhead the implementation of the SDGs in the country and in their respective sectors; ensure that the SDGs are mainstreamed in the development planning documents and; track and report on progress on SDGs. The WG has been sensitized on the SDGs and the strategies to localize the SDGs. The Council of Governors (the representative body of all governors in the country) is also involved in capacity building of SDGs at the devolved level in collaboration with the National Government.  He planning and budgetary officers at the sub national level have been trained. Emphasis has been given to the Training of Trainers (TOTs) who will train others in their respective institutions. 
 
As result of the importance the government is placing on the implementation of the Agenda 2030, all Ministries, Department and Agencies have been directed to mainstream the SDGs into policy, planning, budgeting as well as monitoring and evaluation systems and processes. This is a demonstration of the firm commitment by the leadership of this country to sustainable development. 
As follow up on this, the country mapped out all SDGs targets and indicators against the mandates of the MDAs and assigned the SDGs to the respective development actors. To ensure that MDAs play their respective roles, the ministry responsible for coordinating the implementation, monitoring and reporting on SDGs in the country has reviewed the 4th cycle Strategic Plan Guidelines to ensure that the SDGs are mainstreamed in MDAsi Strategic Plans. The SDGs have also been mainstreamed in the Performance Contracting and MDAs are expected to be reporting to the ministry on a quarterly basis on the progress made in the implementation of the SDGs. One of the areas to report on is the awareness creation on SDGs among their staff members as well as the stakeholders in their respective sectors. 
The experience with the implementation of the MDGs in the country showed that progress in the implementation of such commitments depend on effective partnership with the active engagement of all stakeholders including government, civil society, parliament, the private sector, and the United Nations system among others. Therefore the government has continued to engage stakeholders in the SDGs process.  The preparation of this report is a good example of how the government is engaging other stakeholders.  
In addition, the country under the leadership of the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics(KNBS) has mapped out 128 indicators whose data can be available within the short run and work is going on to increase the number of indicators within the next five years. The indicators have already been discussed within the national government and plans are underway to share them with the sub national governments for their inputs and ownership across government. The indicators will be shared with other stakeholders before finalization.  The KNBS has identified the period 2009-2014 as the base period for the SDGs. This is based on data availability and the priorities of the country. The indicators will be used to track and report on the process and progress of the implementation.  
The preparation of the Medium Term Plan III (MTP) will be through involvement of all stakeholders who will be represented in the National MTP Coordination Forum and the Medium Term Sector Working Groups (MTPSWGs). The grassroots and County consultative forums and National Consultative fora will serve as avenues to obtain consensus on the MTP III priorities, strategies, programmes and projects. The budgeting process through the MTEF process follows almost a similar pattern. The preparation of the County Integrated Development Plans is also consultative and therefore creating ownership. 
3.2 	Incorporation of the Sustainable Development Goals in National  	Frameworks 
 
The Kenya Vision 2030 is the national long-term development policy that aims to transform the country into a newly industrializing, middle-income country providing a high quality of life to all its citizens in a clean and secure environment by 2030.. The Vision is implemented at both the national and sub-national levels through a five year Medium Term Plan and County Integrated Development Plans respectively. The SDGs will be mainstreamed at these two levels.  
 
 
The first MTP was implemented between 2008 and 2012 and the second MTP is from 2013 to 2017 and the two plans mainstreamed the MDGs. The third and fourth MTPs will be implemented 2018 to 2022 and 2023 to 2028, respectively. The Medium Term Plans identify priority projects and programmes to be implemented in each five years cycle and each is expected to incorporate new and emerging issues.  When Kenya embarked on the preparation of the MTPII, the Post 2015 Agenda was still under deliberation and the next goals far from being finalized. By the time the SDGs were adopted MTP II was in third year of implementation.  However, the consultations that were held brought on board some of the SDGs issues that were captured in MTP II 2013-2017 as they were already a priority for the country at the time. This means that Kenya is already implementing some of the SDGs as well as continuing with the unfinished business of the MDGs. 
 
This Plan is scheduled to end this year (2017) and preparations for MTP III are well underway. Some of the emerging issues already identified to be taken on board are the regional and international commitments that would ensure the mainstreaming of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Africa Agenda 2063. The National Government through consultations with the Council of Governors prepares and disseminates the guidelines for the preparation of the County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs) which sub national government should follow to ensure policy and developmental coherence. The CIDPs mirror the priorities of the MTPs at the sub national level and therefore will ensure the SDGs and Africa Agenda 2063 re mainstreamed at the sub national level. As per the Constitution 2010, sub national governments are now implementing the relevant SDGs targets at the grass root level hence more targeted interventions and strategies. These are expected to fast track the achievement of such targets as well as reduce or eliminate existing regional disparities. 
 
The Kenya Constitution provides citizens with the right to participate in the decision-making process and further directs the national and sub national legislatures respectively to "facilitate public participation" in their work. Therefore the preparation of the development plans and all the strategies are guided by the Constitution and are required to be participatory by involving all stakeholders. The Medium Term Plans are prepared through consultative processes which help in ownership and awareness creation and involve the following; County consultation forums; Sector Working Groups- which consist of Ministries, Departments, Agencies, development partners, academia, women, youth, persons with disabilities, media, private sector, and CSOs. Alongside the MTPs are the Sector Plans (five year cycle) which highlight in detail programmes, projects and policies for implementation during the medium term period.  
 
 
One of the most effective tools in public sector delivery has been the use of Performance Contracting. Following the recent review of the performance contracting framework for Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) all public institutions are expected to mainstream SDGs into their plans, programmes and policies and consequently report to the Ministry of Devolution and Planning on progress of SDGs implementation. In the same vein the second generation Revenue Allocation Formula was reviewed to prioritize the Poverty Index among resource sharing criteria. The Equalization Fund further allocates more public resources to counties with high poverty indices as a way to fast track the reduction of poverty that is critical to the attainment of the SDGs. 
 
Other stakeholders have also integrated SDGs in their core business/mandate including leading private sector companies and Civil Society Organizations. The private sector in Kenya is fairly well developed and therefore has a huge potential to play its part in implementing SDGs. So far it has taken a keen interest on the implementation of the goals. The United Nations Country Team has further embarked on integrating its programmmes into national priorities under the framework of Delivering as One (DAO).  
 
The mainstreaming of SDGs in policy, planning and budgeting and programmes is likely to face some challenges some of which include; 
   
i. Inadequate linkages/coordination between the National and sub national Governments; 
ii. High political turnover/ change of regimes; 
iii. Poor coordination between development partners;.  
 
3.3 Institutional Framework 
 
The lessons learnt during the implementation of the MDGs are that successful implementation of such goals hinges upon the existence of a robust institutional framework with distinct but complimentary roles, responsibilities and accountability mechanisms. The selection of institutions, mandates and relationships that are tasked with coordinating, planning, implementing and monitoring actions towards the SDGs and ensuring a strong institutional framework is therefore critical. The increased coverage of the SDGs including new sectors and specifying the means of implementation requires new modes of institutional collaboration. 
. 
 
The Ministry of Devolution and Planning is responsible for the overall management and coordination of the implementation, monitoring and reporting of SDGs process in Kenya. However, the day to day management and operations of the implementation process is delegated to the SDGs coordinating department which is responsible for planning and overall management of the process; reporting and accounting, monitoring and evaluation of all the SDGs activities. This arrangement is what existed during the MDGs period. 
 
During the MDGs implementation, a number of institutional structures were put in place. In light of the achievements of these institutions, they will be retained and strengthened where necessary while others will be established to incorporate the broader scope of the SDGs. In particular the MDGS Project Implementation Unit has been upgraded to a fully-fledged department and   will continue to be the focal point for coordination of SDGs in the country. 
 
The Inter-Agency Technical Working Group that consists of officers from the key MDGs implementing Ministries is one of the partnerships arrangements that has been retained and strengthened. The WG provides strategic oversight on SDGs programme design and implementation as well as making decisions on strategic programme choices at the national level. The group is responsible for delivering specific goals and targets and is mandated to meet and agree on a coordinated delivery schedule of programmes and ensure effective implementation and reporting. It is also charged with the responsibility of ensuring that various MDAs implement the SDGs and report on the implementation progress in a timely manner.  It also acts as a forum to share information where necessary. 
 
Following the enactment of the devolved laws and the structures created thereof, the Government will take advantage of structures that exist. The Summit, which is co-chaired by the President and the Chair of the Council of Governors and attended by all governors, the Inter-Ministerial Forum and Intergovernmental Sector Forums will provide critical linkages with the sub national Governments. Furthermore, to ensure proper coordination and implementation of the SDGs at the national and sub national levels and between the two levels of Government, sub national governments have been facilitated to establish within the Secretariat of the Council of Governors a SDGs Liaison Office (SLO) which work closely with the 47 sub national governments and the SDGs coordination Department. 
 
The private sector has played a played a key role in the implementation of the SDGs as highlighted in the report. The private sector SDGs Forum is being planned to bring together key stakeholders such as Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA), Kenya National Chamber of Commerce and Industry (KNCCI), Kenya Association of Manufacturers (KAM), Federation of Kenya Employers (FKE) and the Central Organization of Trade Unions (COTU) so as to have a coordinated mechanism for the private sector. 
 
The Civil Society Organizations are critical stakeholders in the SDGs. During the MDGs period they were organized under the Global Coalition for Action against Poverty (GCAP). They are now organized under the SDGs Kenya Forum, which is the national focal point for Non State actors to collaborate on the SDGs agenda. The forum is already active and is also incorporated into the Inter Agency Committee on the Sustainable Development Goals.  
 
A youth caucus is at its early stages of formation and is drawing membership from the National Youth Council while a Parliamentary SDGs Caucus will also be formed after the formation of the new government. Other institutions will be set up on a need basis. 
 
Lessons learnt from MDGs implementation have shown that strong partnerships and collaboration amongst stakeholders are critical in the successful implementation of the SDGs. Given the universality of the SDGs all relevant stakeholders will be involved in the implementation of the SDGs at the national and sub national levels in Kenya. One important step that we have undertaken is the mapping of all relevant stakeholders who will be involved in the implementation of the SDGs.  This will involve renegotiation of the roles, responsibilities and relationships between the different stakeholders and ensure a strong collaboration and creation of synergies which are necessary in implementation of the SDGs. This has proved important in translating 17 SDGs into action.  
 
	3.4 	Integration of Economic, Social and Environmental Dimensions 
 
The Kenya Vision 2030 comprises of three key pillars; Economic, Social and Political. Within the Economic Pillar, Kenya aims to increase annual GDP growth rates to 10% and to maintain that average till 2030. The attainment of the 10% requires macro-economic stability as well as focus on key sectors namely; tourism; value addition in agriculture; wholesaling and retail manufacturing; Business Process Off shoring, and augmentation of financial services Oil, Gas and Minerals. All of which are expected to be the drivers of economic growth    
 
Under the Social Pillar, Kenyais journey towards prosperity also involves the building of a just and cohesive society, enjoying equitable social development in a clean and secure environment. This quest is the basis for transformation in eight key social sectors; Education and Training; 
Health; Water and Sanitation; the Environment; Housing and Urbanization; as well as in Gender, Youth Sports and Culture, Equity and Poverty Reduction. It also makes special provisions for Kenyans with various disabilities and previously marginalized communities. These policies (and those in the Economic Pillar) will be founded on all-round adoption of Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) as an implementation tool.   
 
The National Spatial Plan 2015-2045 launched in March 2017 provides a framework to optimize the utilization of the national territory by reorganizing and adjusting the way land is used to achieve overall efficiency and sustainability. The strategy allocates land to different activities rationally by putting into consideration the land capacities and potentials and by addressing concerns arising from the need to protect and conserve the environment. To underscore the great importance of the Environmental considerations, implementation of projects and programmes can only be undertaken after Environmental Impact Assessment has been undertaken and results shared and validated. There are programmes to ensure protection and conservation of water sources and ecosystems.  
 
	4.0 	LEAVE NO ONE BEHIND 
 
In the past there has been inordinate focus on economic growth. It was expected then that the benefits of economic growth would automatically translate into shared and equitable development for all. It is now apparent that this growth has not been inclusive and in some developing countries and regions the rapid growth has not reduced poverty and neither has it created jobs for the burgeoning youthful population. Though economic growth has had mixed results in many countries especially in Africa, it is generally agreed that the benefits of this growth have not been felt in many sections of the population.   
Although Kenya has experienced mixed economic growth (GDP) since 1960s ranging from as low as 1% to as high as 10%, the high growth has not translated into significant reduction in poverty especially among the poor. Many continue to be excluded from basic social and economic benefits and opportunities for sustainable livelihoods. Inequality still persists and an estimated 45.96% of the population lives below poverty line with regional disparities.  
In response to citizensi demand for greater inclusion in public decision-making and to make development more inclusive and people-centered, Kenyans gave unto themselves the Kenya Constitution 2010 adopting a devolved system of government.  The country is now divided into 47 counties whose governments are now responsible for certain functions in such areas as agriculture, health, early childhood education, water and sanitation services, markets, county public works among others.  Every year, sub national governments receive \0xEBnot less than fifteen per cent of all revenue collected by the National Government as part of the equitable share. In the last three years, the National Government has transferred between 30-34% of such revenue.  Besides such transfers, various other conditional grants are transferred to counties which supplement certain local taxes that can be collected by them.   
These transformational changes have presented numerous opportunities that have catalyzed local economic development and enhanced focus on more equitable public service delivery across the country. Devolution has therefore to a large extent set the country on the surest path towards ensuring leaving no one behind. 
Moreover, specific interventions, targeting the most vulnerable sectors of the population, have been adopted to complement other development initiatives. It is for this reason that Social Protection programmes are well articulated and incorporated in the second Medium Term Plan of Kenya Vision 2030. The focus of the current Medium Term Development Plan (2013 -2017)) is Transforming Kenya: Pathway to devolution, socio n economic development, equity and national unity. 
All the sectors in the Social Pillar of the Plan are either directly or indirectly addressing Social Protection interventions. Addressing inequality will require good statistical information to inform specific intervention strategies.  In Kenya, social protection policy advances have in the past been accompanied by increasing investments in social protection programmes. 
The primary goal of the Kenya Constitution 2010 is to move Kenya towards a more equitable and inclusive future. In particular, Article 43 of the Bill of Rights guarantees all Kenyans economic and social rights including the right to the highest standard of health, education, freedom from hunger and adequate food and decent livelihoods. The Constitution further asserts the right of every person to social security and binds the state to provide appropriate social security to persons who are unable to support themselves and their dependents. This was the rationale for developing the Social Protection Policy 2011.  
The Policy is an important effort by the Government to reduce poverty and the vulnerability of the population to economic, social and natural shocks. It plays an important role in increasing access to basic social services, not only for those with no predictable income but also for those in employment and the self-employed who require financial cushions against future risks such as loss of employment, injury at work, loss of assets, or sickness. It builds on Kenyais commitment to poverty reduction as articulated in various policy documents and development plans including Kenya Vision 2030 and its first and second Medium Term Plans. 
In its commitment ensure that no one is left behind, the Government has been and will continue to implement a number of social protection (SP) programmes.  Such programs and  interventions are implemented by different stakeholders that include Government ministries and agencies, the private sector, communities, households, and other non-state actors. The constitutionally created Equalization Fund, aims at correcting the disadvantage of the previously marginalized areas. It is allocated one half percent of all revenue collection by the national government each year to provide basic services including water, roads health facilities and electricity to marginalized areas. It has ensured that regions with more development challenges receive more public resources as a way of catalyzing movement towards equality within regions and communities. Similarly the provision of free primary school education and tuition free secondary school as well the expansion of Technical and Vocational Educational Training (TVET) institutions to the village level, the Government of Kenya endeavors to ensure that children and pupils from poor backgrounds attain a decent education and life skills that equip them to compete with those from privileged backgrounds 
 
Other programmes include Hunger and Safety Net Programme, Women Enterprise Fund, Youth Enterprise Development Fund, UWEZO (Ability) Fund, Procurement Preferences and Reservations (30 per cent affirmative action policy for women, youth and persons with disabilities) in public procurement National Youth Services Capacity Building Initiatives and the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project (KYEP). These programmes aim at addressing the plight of the less disadvantaged in society, combat poverty, and promote equity. 
 
Citizen participation is embedded in the Kenya Constitution 2010 both as a principle and a national value in Article 10. The Article binds State Organs, State officers and public officers to exercise values such as participation whenever they make or implement public policy decisions. As such citizen involvement in the prioritization, planning, ownership and, sustainability of sub national and national development is an imperative. Further, the Constitution in Article 201 (a) requires openness and unlimited accountability. As part of these processes the vulnerable and the poor should be fully and effectively involved in the countryis development agenda. Citizen participation is crucial in ensuring the protection of rights, transparency, accountability, equity, self-determination, influencing decision-making, effective democratic citizenship and meaningful dialogue. The Ministry of Devolution and Planning has issued Public Participation Guidelines to supporting public officer in giving effect to this constitutional provision. 
The government is also committed to increasing public awareness on their citizen rights and responsibilities under the constitution, the new government dispensation and electoral process. The Kenya National Integrated Civic Education is ongoing and Electoral laws (Amendment) Act 2017 and Elections Campaign Financing Act 2016 have been enacted and implemented. 
To improve access to and the quality and the quality of government services, the government has set up integrated government service centers the Huduma Centers across the count with 66 government services being offered at these centers.

5.0 	PROGRESS MADE IN THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE  	SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS AND TARGETS  
 
As has already been mentioned, some of the SDGs are already mainstreamed in the MTP II and the first generation CIDPs. The remaining ones will be mainstreamed in the MTP III and the second generation CIDPs.  
 
Progress in the implementation is as indicated below: 
 
 
	Goal 1: 	End Poverty in all its Forms Everywhere 	  
 
Poverty is a multi-dimensional indicator of the lack of well- being, reflected in the lack of access to basic necessities such as food, clothing and shelter. The proportion of people living below the national poverty line in 2014 was estimated at 45.2%, which is decrease from 46.8 percent in 2007. This constitutes 50.2% in the rural areas and 33.5% in urban areas. This means that about half of the countryis population in lives below the poverty line. 
The agricultural sector remains important for alleviation of poverty and stimulation of economic growth and development. Therefore the battle for eradication of extreme poverty and hunger and indeed for the achievement of this goal calls for total transformation of the agriculture sector. The agricultural sectoris importance in poverty reduction is as a result of the fact that about 60% of the population earns their livelihood from the sector which also contributes over 50% of the gross domestic product (GDP), about 65% of the export earnings and 18% of the formal employment (Economic Survey, 2015).  Efforts must also be made to ensure that its people are engaged in productive economic activities.  
The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS), has undertaken an integrated household budget survey which is expected to inform the measure of people living on less than $1.25 per day, poverty coping mechanisms, among others and which will establish the current poverty levels. 
Meanwhile, several interventions have been undertaken towards ending poverty in all its forms in and in ending hunger, achieving food security, improving nutrition and promoting sustainable agriculture. 
The National Social Safety Net Programme (NSNP) whose objective is to improve the wellbeing of and increase resilience among specific vulnerable groups in Kenya is one of the major government initiatives to help meet the SDGs.  The programme targets the vulnerable groups who are faced with multiple challenges in their daily life such as inability to afford the basics and various other forms of deprivation. The NSNP comprises of four cash transfer programmes namely: Hunger Safety Net Programme Cash Transfers (HSNP-CT); Orphans and Vulnerable Children- Cash Transfers (OVC-CT), Older Persons- Cash Transfers (OP-CT) and Persons with Severe Disability- Cash Transfers (PWSD-CT). Data available shows that the governmentis budgetary allocation for social protection has increased over time. For example, the budget allocation for the elderly increased from Kshs. 3.2 billion ($32 million) in 2013/14 to Kshs. 5.1 billion ($51 million) in 2014/15, a 59.4 per cent increase (KNBS, 2015). In addition, direct cash disbursement to the elderly increased substantially from Kshs. 2.9 billion ($29 million) in 2013/14 to Kshs. 4.9 billion ($49 million) in 2014/15 whilst the direct cash disbursement to Orphans and Vulnerable Children (OVC) increased from Kshs. 4.55 billion ($45.5 million) in 2013/14 to Kshs. 5.8 billion ($55 million) in 2014/15, a 27.5 per cent increase. The number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000 people was 1 in 2014 and increased to 2 in 2015 before declining to 1 in 2016. 
The proportion of population without access to essential services (education, health and social protection) has been declining over time. In 2014, it stood at 21.2 percent, before declining to 20.4 percent in 2015 and further to 20.2 in 2016.  The proportion of total government allocation on education, health and social protection for 2016/2017 Financial year was 23.1 Per cent of total revenues 
To address the plight of the less disadvantaged in society, combat poverty, and promote equity, the social protection safety net in form of cash transfers was   enhanced in 2016/17 as follows: Kshs. 7.9 billion for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (OVC); Kshs. 7.3 billion for elderly persons; Kshs. 1.5 billion for those with disabilities; Kshs. 0.4 billion for street families rehabilitation; and Kshs. 0.4 billion for Children Welfare Society. Other interventions include: Equalization Fund and National Government Constituencies Development Fund (CDF). In 2016/2017 Financial year the government allocated Kshs 68.7 Billion (USD 65 million) about 4.4% Per cent of total revenues for direct poverty reduction programmes. 
 
The country has also reviewed its legal framework to facilitate actions towards poverty reduction. For example the Sessional Paper No. 2 of 2016 on National Slum Upgrading and Prevention Policy that provide for legal and institutional framework for effective slum upgrading and prevention on a sustainable basis, adoption of the Mining and Mineral Policy that stipulates a mineral royalty sharing regime; where 10 per cent of the revenue goes to community, 20 per cent to sub national Government and 70 per cent to National Government. There is also the National Disaster Reduction Strategy and Policy, and  National Disaster Preparedness and Response Strategies. 
Kenya has also developed the Ending Drought Emergencies strategy which commits the government to end the worst of the sufferings caused by drought by 2022 using two main strategies. The first strategy focuses on strengthening the basic foundations for growth and development including security, infrastructure and human capital. The second one focuses on strengthening the institutional and financing frameworks for drought risk management. This strategy builds on the National policy for the Sustainable Development of the Northern Kenya and other Arid Lands. The National Drought and Management Authority has been created to implement the strategy. 
 
Challenges 
 
1. Inadequate investments that would translate to huge job creation. 
2. Rural and urban dimensions of poverty 
3. Regional disparities within the country and regions 
4. Socio cultural practices that impede re-orientation of production systems 
 
 
Goal 2: 	End Hunger, Achieve Food Security and Improved Nutrition and   	 	Promote Sustainable Agriculture 
 
Across Kenya, households are highly dependent on buying their food and therefore market integration and food prices are key determinants of household food security. The indicator of food price anomalies was 5.66% in 2014 before decreasing to 3.5% in 2016. Rural households purchase around 76 percent of their food consumption days, while the pastoralist community in Kenyais poorest and most Arid and Semi Arid Lands (ASALs) areas have to buy all commodities apart from livestock products and milk. As a result, they have high levels of low dietary diversity. Food security levels would quickly drop in the likely event of a drought that would make their animals less productive or die and in the event of food price rises. 
 
Over the years, the proportion of people who suffer from hunger has been fluctuating. Kenya also faces malnutrition especially in area with poor intake of adequate and nutritious food in children leading to stunting, wastage, immune-compromise, high morbidity incidences with poor health outcomes among children. Prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years of age is 26 percent down from 35.3 percent (KDHS 2008). However, there is a marked urban/rural difference whereby the prevalence rises to 29.1 percent in rural areas compared to 19.8 percent in urban areas. Prevalence of malnutrition among children under 5 is 4.1 percent, considered acceptable by WHO cut-offs a marked improvement from 6.7 percent in 2008. However, levels are high for children in the poorest households, in households with poor food consumption, and in households with high coping strategies. This, however, is likely to change drastically with increased devolved funding.  
 
In order to ensure progress in the  attainment of this goal, the country needs to fast track interventions to enhance high quality and quantity food production, access and availability through increased agricultural productivity as a way of ensuring  increased household access to food in sufficient quantity, quality and surplus for sale. Towards this, the government has been implementing irrigation projects like the  Galana Kulalu Irrigation Project, interventions to transform agriculture from subsistence to productive commercial farming and subsidizing fertilizer and seeds, distribution of drought tolerant crops, strengthening the PPPs framework; implementation of livestock and livelihood support projects, construction and renovation of fresh-produce markets; provision of extension services to improve horticultural and livestock farming.  
During the period under review period, the government strengthened research and development through revamping and restructuring the Kenya Agricultural Research Institute (KARI) by putting together all agriculture and livestock related research institutes1 to form the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization (KALRO). This is expected to diversify seeds, cultivated plants, farmed and domesticated animals and their related wild species. 
Efforts by non-state actors to support the implementation of this goal including providing ready market to small holder farmers in ASAL areas, piloting the fertilizer to establish suitability of local soil and crop requirements, providing micronutrient powder (MNP) to children aged 6-59 months,  offerings peer-to-peer service that helps farmers share information with each other via SMS or through internet helping farmers get market information and improve their agriculture productivity and providing up-to-date market information linking farmers to buyers through our marketplace and current agriculture-trends.   
Challenges 
 
i. The adverse effects of climate change leading to severe droughts, crop diseases and pests resulting in lower agricultural productivity; 
ii. Inappropriate agronomic methods and practices; 
iii. High population growth rates exerting pressure onto the limited productive arable land leading to land fragmentation into unviable farming units. This has led to declining trends in agricultural productivity and food insecurity.  
iv. Emergence and re-emergence of both crop and livestock diseases and pests exacerbated as well as cross-border livestock diseases; 
v. Inadequate marketing strategies and systems for agricultural products; and 
vi. Low uptake and adoption of modern technology, especially in the agricultural, livestock and fisheries sector. 
 
	Goal 3: 	Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well-being for all at all Ages 
 
The health sectoris goal is, \0xECto attain equitable, affordable, accessible and quality health care for all Kenyan citizens and thereby, reduce health inequalities while also reversing the downward trend that has been seen in health-related outcome and impact indicators. The progress on health goals is anchored on the Kenya Health Policy, 2014 - 2030 and the Kenyan Health Sector Strategic and Investment Plan (KHSSP, July 2014 - June 2018) that have six policy objectives and seven strategic objectives which provide the policy frame work to progress towards attainment of vision 2030 goal for the health sector. The six policy objectives includes; eliminate communicable diseases, halt and reverse burden of Non-communicable diseases, reduce the burden of violence and injuries, provide essential health care ,minimize the exposure to health risk factors and strengthen collaboration with sector providers. 
Despite of the initiatives implemented during the MDGs period, maternal mortality ratio, and infant and under five mortality remains unacceptably high at 362/100,000, 39 per 1000 live births and 52 per 1000 live births respectively. Malaria incidence per 1,000 populations is 225. The proportion of births attended by skilled health personnel is 61.8 which is an increase from 43 percent in 2011.Tuberculosis incidence per 1,000 populations was 90 in 2015.The overall TB Treatment Completion Rate  increased to 90% while TB treatment cure rate improved to 85%.   Death rate due to road traffic injuries per 100,000 populations was 11 in 2014 before increasing to 12 in 2015 and declining to 11 in 2016. 
 
Currently, the number of new HIV infections per 1,000 uninfected is 146.According to the HIV estimates report(2016) HIV preference rate realized a significant drop from 6.7% in 2003 to 5.9% in 2015. However, the prevalence rate among women at 6.3% remains higher than their male counterparts at 5.5% in 2015. The number of new infections annually fell by 19% overll and by 66% with regards to transmission from mother to child from 12,000 to 4,6000 between 2013 and 2016. The proportion of pregnant women, adults and children who tested positive and were put on ARVs increased to 66% of those living with HIV and an estimated 580,000 deaths were averted by 2016 by scaling up ART. 
 
The HIV and AIDS equity Tribunal was established in 2009, under section 25 of the HIV prevention and Control Act of 2006. IT is the only HIV specific statutory body in the world and it is granted powers of a subordinate court and has the broad mandate to \0xECear and determine complaints arising out any breach of the provisions of HAPCA, excluding criminal jurisdiction and may perform any other such functions as may be conferred upon if by HAPCA or any other written law being in force. The tribunal has contributed to reducing HIV related stigma and discrimination through various awards, and has presented an alternative avenue for redress for HIV related human rights violations and has improved justice adjudication over 2000 cases. As the only judicial mechanism in the world specifically dedicated to the epidemic, HIV and AIDS Tribunal of Kenya can serve as a possible model for replication in other countries. 
 
To mitigate this, the health sector has been rolling out several initiatives aimed at promoting prosperity. They include: Comprehensive and Expanded Immunization programme that includes pneumococcal vaccine for children to cover emerging diseases and ailments which has led to a reduction in Infant and Child Mortality. Exclusive breast-feeding campaigns and introduction of supplemental foods is geared towards reducing mortality rates. Mass distribution of Long Lasting Insecticidal Mosquito nets has reduced the incidence of Malaria especially among Lake Region communities.  The increase on the proportions of birth assisted by skilled health providers during delivery, health facilities deliveries and post-natal care are also cited as factors that lowered both Child and Infant Mortality.   
 
The HIV and AIDS equity Tribunal was established in 2009, under section 25 of the HIV prevention and Control Act of 2006. IT is the only HIV specific statutory body in the world and it is granted powers of a subordinate court and has the broad mandate to \0xECear and determine complaints arising out any breach of the provisions of HAPCA, excluding criminal jurisdiction and may perform any other such functions as may be conferred upon if by HAPCA or any other written law being in force. The tribunal has contributed to reducing HIV related stigma and discrimination through various awards, and has presented an alternative avenue for redress for HIV related human rights violations and has improved justice adjudication over 2000 cases. As the only judicial mechanism in the world specifically dedicated to the epidemic, HIV and AIDS Tribunal of Kenya can serve as a possible model for replication in other countries. 
 
Health Insurance Subsidy Programme (HISP), is an initiative aimed at contributing to better quality of life, poverty alleviation and human development through meeting population health needs; removal of financial barriers to health care and reduce incidences of catastrophic health expenditures. This will be realized by consolidating and expanding social health subsidy mechanisms with view to achieving Universal Health Coverage (UHC).  This project targets about 21,530 households of which 17,612 households have been registered to access health services from the hospital of their choice.  
 
Social Health Insurance is one of the most innovative and efficient ways of financing healthcare. It has been recognized in the Kenya Vision 2030 as one of the pillars for Kenya to achieve Universal Health Coverage. In this regard, government has been promoting reforms in the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) to make it one of the key drivers for achieving universal health coverage. The aim is to allow access to comprehensive health care for all including vulnerable persons, orphans and the elderly. These recent reforms since 2013 have included, changing the management structure at NHIF to make the institution more effective and responsive to customer needs; reviewing the contributions of all members n after the previous rates stagnated for over 20 years; expanding the benefit package to include in-patient and out-patient cover, major and minor surgeries, cardiac conditions and chronic illness, comprehensive cover for civil servants and disciplined forces and new packages related to addressing non-communicable conditions and instituting strategies to enroll more members. This has resulted in improved access to high quality comprehensive health care at subsidized costs and enhanced access to healthcare by Kenyans particularly the vulnerable segments of the society. 
The Managed Equipment Service has allowed Medical facilities to acquire vital hardware as a way to improve access to comprehensive Kenya Essential Package for Health (KEPH) services by different constituents of Kenyais population. Specifically, the project is set to contribute towards acquisition of the requisite infrastructure and equipment to about 100 current Level 4 County Hospitals to the accepted norms and standards. Further these facilities will enable them to provide a wide range of comprehensive health care services and provide prompt diagnosis of non- communicable conditions. The government is also upgrading of health facilities in informal settlements to increase access to vital health care services through a  project that uses mobile services to reach deep into these areas.   
 
The Beyond Zero Campaign initiative by H.E. First Lady, Mrs. Margaret Kenyatta aims to end preventable deaths among women and children and give new impetus to fight against HIV through policy prioritization, resource allocation and improved service delivery. The campaign seeks to leverage on the convening power of the First Lady for strengthening  existing health  and community  systems, mobilizing the contributions of private and public sectors and development partners, catalyzing innovation and accelerating action by stakeholders and political leaders and promote leadership and accountability at family, community and national levels for the full implementation of Kenyais HIV, maternal and child health commitments. The achievements of the campaign include delivery of mobile clinics to all 47 county referral hospitals in the country. By bringing health delivery closer to Kenyais citizens, the mobile clinics have been able to treat mothers and children who would otherwise have been obliged to walk miles to seek treatment. This has contributed to a 66% drop in HIV infections from mother to child between 2013 and 2016. 
 
In addition to the above initiatives, health worker density and distribution per 100,000 populations has improved from 21 doctors and 165 nurses in 2014 and increased to 23 doctors and 230 nurses in 2016 which support these initiatives. 
 
At the sub national level, there are a number of innovative initiatives to address health at the community level. These include; 
 
Mother waiting home (KIROR): An initiative of West Pokot sub national Government. This is a home outside their home and a home outside the health facility. The KIROR are facilities constructed next to a health. Expectant mothers move to the KIROR a few days to their expected day of delivery and are monitored during labour by the health personnel at the health facility. This ensures that the expectant mothers do not have to travel long distances when in labour. These facilities help in reducing congestion at the health facility while at the same time getting prompt services of qualified personnel during delivery. 
 
Kenya HIV and Health situation room: As part of the big data collaboration, this platform has revolutionalized data management programme tracking and evaluation by bringing together data from four(4) different agencies of Government in five(5) sub-system to provide easy to interpret graphical representation of the HIV situation on health facility and community services uptake, commodity supply that is allowing national and county managers to track performance real-time. It is now being expanded to other reproductive maternal health indicators. 
 
The sub national Government of Embu has introduced the commodity exchange programme. This starts with the formation of a county commodity security/Exchange team on WhatsApp social platform. This commodity group has seen a lot of action since its inception. Sub county pharmacists are always busy facilitating the collection of commodities and transferring them to needy sites. It has become much easier to source commodities for sites that run out of essential items and Priority program commodities. 
 
Garissa County Health Management Team adapted the provision of MAMA kits to pregnant mothers and incentives to Traditional Birth Attendants (TBAs) to improve skilled deliveries. 
 
Reproductive Maternal Newborn, Child and Adolescent Health (RMNCAH) Project is a six sub national initiative that focuses on improving maternal and newborn outcomes in six high burden maternal mortality counties in Kenya2.The select  counties contribute about 50% of maternal deaths nationally. In those counties, a total of 507 additional health care facilities received Managed NH equipment and are now providing Emergency Obstetric and New born care (EmONC) services. The private sector has also made contribution to this goal as outlined below. 
 
The private sector contribution towards improving health care outcomes include a KEPSA/UNICEF project aimed at improving maternal and infant nutrition through sensitizing members of the private sector on the need to promote exclusive breastfeeding for children by providing working mothers with a conducive working environment as well as providing  breaks for them to breastfeed their children. The project encourages businesses to create mother and baby friendly spaces which includes the creation of a lactation station for lactating mothers.  
 
Mtiba- is a mobile health wallet for healthcare savings, payments and bonus schemes developed by the private It allows individuals and organizations to distribute funds for healthcare to people who rely on them. They can be sure that those funds will be used for healthcare only. 
And they know that their dependents are being treated at clinics that charge fair prices and follow internationally recognized quality standards. 
 
Private sector has also created the Pampers Mobile Clinic Program, providing free basic health checks, health talks and products to mothers and their babies. The Pampers vaccine program eliminates neonatal tetanus, a preventable disease that claims the life of 58,000 babies in developing countries each year.  
 
Another initiative involve offering a one-stop shop across six distinct healthcare services namely: medical equipment supply, installation and after-sales service; construction of new medical facilities or upgrade of existing facilities infrastructure; mobile clinics fabrication and deployment; medical applications training; turnkey healthcare programs implementation (PMO); and hospital information systems (HIS) and healthcare information technology (HCIT) deployment 
 
The Kenya government has a devolved system of government and has devolved health service provision with the aim of improving health outcomes at the sub national and national level because through improved health service delivery. One of the primary functions that the central government has ceded to the sub national government through devolution is health service delivery, where sub national Governments are responsible for delivery of a majority of health services mainly primary level care and curative services. 
To ensure the planning is properly done, counties are required to develop several plans. Each sub national government must have: 
a) An integrated development plan-This gives a roadmap for development in the county over a five-year period.  
b) Sector plans- Every sector in the county must also have a ten-year plan, explaining how health, agriculture or water and sanitation will be managed. 
c) Ten-year spatial plans nThis explains how the county will manage land and development across the entire county. 
The Constitution and devolution laws, particularly the County Government Act, 2012 require the involvement of residents in the preparation of all these plans. 
Challenges 
 
1. Health financing and purchasing of health care services still has a serious implication on access and quality of health care;   
2. Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) are exerting pressure to the health system. Despite the awareness on the risk factors of NCDs, there has been no significant change on the lifestyle amongst the general population. Cancer, hypertension, heart disease and diabetes are rising and emerging as major health problems.  Cancer alone is estimated to cause 21,000 deaths annually;   
3. Data unavailability especially on neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), cancer and outbreak diseases.  
4. Childbirth related conditions continue to pose significant challenges, especially inadequacy of emergency services for delivery, under-utilization of existing antenatal services and inadequate skills and competences of health workers in this area. 
 
 
Goal 4: 	Ensure Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and Promote   	 	Lifelong Learning Opportunities for all 
 
During the MDGs period, commendable progress was made in the implementation of the goals on education which.  These were mainly as a result of the introduction of free primary education (FPE) in 2003 that led to significant increase in both GER and NER. It is also as result of the fact that the push for attainment of UPE is enshrined and protected under the Bill of Rights in the Kenya Constitution 2010. Education is one of the most critical factors of empowering and driving positive economic development and social progression in any country and therefore has positive effect on all the other SDGS and their respective targets and indicators.  
In response, Kenya has embarked on the development and embracing of various policies, strategies, guidelines and programmes geared toward the goal which has resulted in progress in the following areas; Participation rate in organized learning increased from 70.2 to 74.6 to 74.9 percent in 2014, 2015 and 2016 respectively.   
In tandem with the sharp increase in the number of children attending early learning centers, the proportion of teachers for pre-primary who had received at least the minimum organized teacher training increased from 84.1 percent in 2014 to 86.7 in 2015 and to 88.2 in 2016. The enrolment at Technical and Vocational Education Training (TVET) increased from 147,821 (75,105 n Male and 49,454 - Female) in 2014 and to 153,314 (79,846 n Male and 52,927- Female) in 2015 before increasing to 202,556 (91,209 n Male and 74,432 - Female) in 2016. Adult education enrollment was 330,340 (113,552 n Male and 216,788 - Female) in 2014 before decreasing to 306,228 (102,076 n Male and 204,152- Female) in 2015 and to 271,769 (85,575 n Male and 186,194 - Female) in 2016. This is as a result of the initiatives being implemented in this sector which includes; 
The implementation of the Digital Literacy Programme (ICT Integration in Primary Education) whose main aim is the integration of ICT into teaching and learning for pupils in primary schools has had a strong take-off. The components of this project include: improvement of ICT infrastructure; development of digital content; capacity building of teachers and implementers; and procurement of ICT devices. 
The inclusion of ECDE into the primary school education programme has led to the increase in number of trained ECDE teachers by 9.8 per cent for the period 2013 to 2015 in tandem with the sharp increase in the number of children attending early learning centers. .Other programmes include; continued implementation of the Free Primary Education (FPE) programme which has greatly contributed to an increase in primary school education enrolment over the years. The government has enforced the re-entry policy to address dropout cases of young mothers who conceived while in school; sanitary towels programme which enhance girlsi participation in learning;. Implementation of a bursary Scheme to assist selected secondary school students meet other education expenses which are not catered for by Free Day Secondary Education and provision of Grants to ASAL and Pockets of Poverty. The total number of public secondary school teachers increased from 65,494 in 2013 to 85,438 in 2015. 
 
Towards enhancing inclusivity, Special Needs Education is being provided at special schools, integrated schools and special units attached to regular schools. Currently enrolment stands at 102, 749. Since January 2016, 184 special boarding schools (167 primary schools, 8 secondary schools and 6 technical /vocational institutions) received capitation grants. The expansion of TVET institutions has resulted to an increase in enrolment by 4.7 in the period under review.  
 
Private sector has also made contribution towards this goal with some examples including internet for Schools programme which provides free 3G Internet for Schools to both primary and secondary across Kenya. Through the project, 322 schools have been connected, impacting the lives of over 200,000 students in 33 counties out of the 47 counties in Kenya.  More than 100 schools have been provided with tablet devices that will capture data about students and the facilities. From the information acquired, leaders will have a better understanding of current progress and challenges as well as be able to offer recommendations for improvement.  
 
Challenges 
 
i. High cost of sustaining the financing of Free Primary Education (FPE) and free tuition education for secondary education; 
ii. Overcrowding in schools in general and in classrooms, especially in areas with high population densities, especially in the urban slums; 
iii. Perennial droughts in most parts of the country coupled with the resultant hunger especially. in the ASAL regions  exacerbates the already high rates of school dropouts of children; and 
iv. Existing regional disparities which continue to negatively impact on the countryis commitment to attain education for all and universal primary education. 
 
	Goal 5: 	Achieve Gender Equality and empower all Women and Girls 
 
The government has recognized that women empowerment is critical in effectively combating poverty, hunger and disease in the country and also a way to stimulate development and achievement of the other SDGs.  For a long period of time now, the government has undertaken initiatives aimed at promoting gender equality and empowerment of women with the aim of ensuring equal access, control and resource distribution to improve livelihood for the marginalized categories of people, including women, people with disability (PWDs) and other vulnerable groups.  
The Constitution of Kenya, under the Bill of Rights, obligates the State to address the needs of the vulnerable persons in the society with emphasis on protection of the marginalized  groups in the society among them women and, persons with disability (PWDs). The government has enacted laws to protect women inheritance of their fatheris and or spouseis properties including land and the laws over ride customary laws and considerations. The constitution also created the National Gender and Equality Commission whose mandate is to promote gender equality and freedom from discrimination. There has been mixed progress in the achievement of this goal and its targets. The table below shows the proportion of women in senior leadership positions 
  
  
Table 5-1: Women in Decision Making Positions 
  
  
2014 

2016 

F 
M 
Total 
% 

F 
M 
Total 
% 
Categories 
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
Cabinet Secretaries 
6 
12 
18 

33.3 
5 
15 
20 
25.0
Principal Secretaries 
7 
19 
26 

26.9 
15 
26 
41 
36.6
Diplomatic Corps 
15 
48 
63 

23.8 
18 
46 
64 
28.1
County Commissioners 
18 
29 
47 

38.3 
18 
29 
47 
38.3
Sub-County Commissioners 
32 
262 
294 

10.9 
40 
255 
295 
13.6
Deputy Secretaries 
58 
137 
195 

29.7 
66 
149 
215 
30.7
Supreme Court Judges 
2 
5 
7 

28.6 
2 
5 
7 
28.6
Court of Appeal Judge 
9 
21 
30 

30.0 
7 
18 
25 
28
High Court Judge 
37 
60 
97 

38.1 
37 
59 
96 
38.5
Magistrates 
219 
239 
458 

47.8 
216 
222 
438 
49.3
Kadhis 
0 
35 
35 

0.0 
0 
56 
56 
0.0
Chiefs 
101 
2489 
2590 

3.9 
126 
2464 
2590 
4.9
Assistant Chiefs 
473 
5413 
5886 

8.0 
489 
5397 
5886 
8.3
Practicing Lawyers 
2581 
4193 
6774 

38.1 
2738 
4347 
7085 
38.7
 Source: Various 
 
The table above shows that representation of women in various leadership and political levels is still below the Constitutional provision of not more than 2/3rd in elective and appointive position. In pursuit of this goal, the government has undertaken and continues to undertake a number of initiatives. Various policy and legal frameworks have been developed/enacted to promote, enforce and monitor equality and non-discrimination. To ensure women aged 15- 49 years have access to sexual and reproductive health care, information and education, Kenya has developed eight (8) policies. 
To improve on representation of women in leadership position, the government is undertaking an aggressive capacity building programme targeting the 2017 election women aspirants and leaders both at National and sub national levels. The Country is also in process of enacting a law to implement the not more than 2/3rd gender principle in the Constitution. Further, a strategy for the empowerment of women to enhance their participation in elective bodies has also been prepared. 
 
Kenya has also been producing gender datasheet to guide Policy formulation and planning. Status of women report 2015 which provides information on the status of women across various sectors has also been prepared Further, the Government is undertaking capacity building on gender statistics for Statistical officers, planning officers and gender officers both at National and sub national levels to enhance collection, collation and analysis of sex disaggregated data. Tracking of Budgetary allocation towards women empowerment endeavors including women enterprise.  
 
  
Kenya has gender based Violence (GBV) Helpline 1195 that affords quick access to GBV services including referral after violation. It is a 24 hour toll-free hotline that responds to sexual and gender based violence. The goal of GBV hotline and the call up centre is to involve community members and survivors in the fight against all forms of violence that is meted on women and children within the recommended 72 hour window period.  
The Government is also implementing various affirmative action programmes for empowerment of women, Youth and PWDs. These include: Women Enterprise Fund, UWEZO Fund, National Government Affirmative Action Fund and the Youth Enterprise 
Fund.    
 
Another affirmative program geared towards achievement of gender equity is  the Access to Government Procurement Opportunities (AGPO) which reserves 30% of all public procurement at both the National and County governments to women, youth and persons with disabilities.  
 
Challenges 
 
i. Harmful and prohibitive socio-cultural traditional practices and beliefs such as female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) by some communities; 
ii. High level of  tolerance  of Gender Based Violence in some communities, persist as social -cultural norms on GBV thus significantly impairing prevention of GBV; and 
iii. Continued existence of gender inequalities with regard to access and control of resources, economic opportunities, political as well as power. 
 
 
Goal 6: 	Ensure Availability and Sustainable Management of Water and   	 	Sanitation for all 
 
In Kenya like in other countries, access to safe, adequate and reliable water supply is one of the central indicators of socio-economic development (KNBS, Economic Survey, 2014).The percentage of population using safely managed drinking water services was 66.9 percent as at 2014 which implies that a large proportion of Kenyans have no access to safe and reliable sources of drinking water.. Since 2014, an additional 3.3 million people have access to clean and safe drinking water as a result of the construction and expansion of water supply schemes in urban and rural areas. The percentage of rural households with access to clean and safe Water increased from 45 percent in 2013 to 50.2 percent in 2015 This situation is expected to improve tremendously since Water & Sanitation services is a Devolved function under the devolved governance structure.  
 
Some of the initiatives to improve access include construction and expansion of water supply schemes in urban and rural areas. The Nairobi sub national government for example has installed public water dispensing machines enabling city residents living in informal settlements to access quality water cheaply. The water dispensers use AQtap technology and the residents pay for water using mobile technology.  This has reduced the cost of water to the community as well as improved revenue collection by the company. 
 
To ensure access to sanitation across the country, the government has been expanding the sewerage system whereby 887,511 urban households were connected to sewerage system in 2015/2016 financial year. This is ongoing and it expected that at the end of 2018/2019 additional 388,363 households will be connected. 
 
The water of Life Programme is a private sector initiative that has invested in 78 different water and sanitation projects in Kenya, impacting over 3 million people. The programme is dedicated to devising new approaches that will solve water-related challenges locally and sustainably manage water use within businesses. The \0xECCitizen Field Engineer project in Nairobi, is another innovative initiative that uses sensors to monitor water quality and supply which enables community residents to govern, maintain, and repair the physical infrastructure for water delivery. In exchange for their monitoring, residents receive mobile credits, thereby providing a financial incentive to continue with their water management.  
 
Challenges 
  
i. Weak data collection and management practice in some of the water sector institutions and in the counties limits the availability and accuracy of data; 
ii. Insufficient institutional, human, financial and technological capacity continues to hamper adequate development in the water resources sector;  
iii. Climate change impacts on the quality, quantity, timing, form and intensity of precipitation leading to decreased water resources.  
iv. The investment in water supply and sewerage is not coping with population growth and the demand for services; 
v. Water pollution 
 
Goal 7: 	Ensure Access to Affordable, Reliable, Sustainable and Modern   	 	Energy for all 
 
Development of the energy sector is critical if Kenya is to achieve the Kenya Vision 2030 and become a newly industrializing, middle income country. Kenya possess significant potential sources for power generation in geothermal, wind and biomass energy. Kenyais electricity installed capacity stands at 2,334MW as at 2015. In the medium term, the target is to increase installed electricity capacity by 5,538MW to slightly over 6,700MW by 2017.  Overall, 61 percent of the total power generation capacity is expected to come from renewable sources.  As at November 2015, approximately 86 percent of power generation capacity was from renewable sources: hydro, geothermal and wind. The goal of the energy sector is to ensure that every Kenyan has access to electricity. To achieve this, about 5.95 million households have been connected to electricity supply which is 144 percent increase in three years resulting in 33 million or 65 percent access to electricity. During the same period, 23,337 or 97 percent public primary schools were connected to electricity which is an increase of 170 percent. The percentage of population with primary reliance on clean fuels and technology was 11.9 percent in 2014. At the same time, the renewable energy share in the total final energy consumption stood at 12.4 percent in 2014 before decreasing slightly to 11.8 percent in 2016. The increase in electricity connections has positive an impact on socio-economic development including job creation enhances security of lives and property enhances implementation of Digital Literacy Programme. 
   
Currently, Kenya is building the largest wind farm in Africa, the Lake Turkana Wind Power Consortium (LTWP). It aims to provide 300 MW of low-cost electrical power. Once operational, it will allow the country to eliminate its thermal generating plants, saving Kshs. 
15.6 billion (US $180 million) per year on imported fuel. 
 
Geothermal power has the potential to provide reliable, cost-competitive, base load power with a small carbon footprint, and reduces vulnerability to climate by diversifying power supply away from hydropower, which currently provides the majority of Kenyais electricity. Kenya currently has 636 MW of installed geothermal capacity and aims to have 5,530 MW of geothermal power or 26% of total capacity by 2030. This will make it Kenya's largest source of electricity clean energy by 2030. Geothermal power plants have a prominent place in Kenyais overarching development plans.  
 
The Mwananchi Gas Project under implementation aims at promoting the use of clean energy sources to protect the health of Kenyans while protecting the environment from degradation. It is expected to increase LPG gas usage from 10 percent to 26 percent on completion. By September 2017, 10,6 million Kenyans will have access to clean cooking energy. 
 
The private sector contribution to this goal includes the Mkopa solar product that aims at enabling off-grid communities to leap from using unreliable non-renewable energy to affordable and sustainable practices, without the process of excessive polluting in between.  
 
Others include the development of a Carbon Action Plan, with the aim of increasing the use of energy from renewable sources with dedicated projects. Some of these include (photovoltaic power plants, cogeneration plant powered by vegetable oil, biomass plant for steam generation and supply of electricity from wind power Households have also been supported to invest in improved cook stoves and to access small solar systems for lighting and basic electricity services.  
 
Challenges 
 
	i. 	The high cost and long lead time in the development of energy generation projects;  
 
Goal 8: 	Promote Sustained, Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth,   	 	Full and Productive Employment and Decent Work for all 
 
The Kenya Vision 2030 envisions an economy growing at 10% annually with certain key flagship projects that are expected to create many decent jobs and lead to growth of micro, small and medium size enterprises. Kenya has made progress in a number of areas. The countryis economic growth rate has been gradual ranging from 5.7% in 2015 to 5.8% in 2016. The annual growth rate of real GDP per capita is at 3.12% while the annual growth rate of real GDP per employed person was -0.55% in 2014 and increased to 0.33 in 2016. A number of initiatives have been implemented to promote Sustainable Economic Growth and address the issue of unemployment as outlined below.  
 
The government through the Ministry of Education initiated a programme to construct Technical Institutes in every constituency to bolster the capacity of the existing ones to increase the number of youths with skills and enhance employability .The government has developed a National Industrial Training and attachment policy  to guide industrial training and attachment  in the country. Between 2013/14 and February 2017, 64, 899 trainees were placed on industrial attachments. A online industrial attachment portal has been established. This is aimed at equipping the youths with the relevant skills and increase employability and productivity as well as improved linkages between industry and training institutions. The youth enterprise fund has been streamlined to empower youth to start and grow their own businesses. The National Youth Service programme has engaged the unemployed youth and imparted skills thereby opening employment opportunities. The implementation of the preferential procurement policies (affirmative action on government procurement) supports enterprises run by the vulnerable and thereby creating jobs and employment opportunities. 
  
The Government continues to expand social cash transfers to additional households as part of its National Safety Net Program for Results. The country has strong laws prohibiting child labour and has a vibrant Child Labour Division which monitors enforcement and coordinates activities to eliminate child labour. The judiciary has a specialized Childrenis Court that listen to cases involving abuse of children in Kenya.  
 
The Banking Act 2016 is the culmination of numerous attempts to ensure increase in access and affordability of credit from financial institutions.  At present, interest rates are capped at about 14% for all formal bank loans.  On the same vain the treasury directed all importers of goods to purchase maritime insurance from local insurance company as a way to increase growth of local insurance companies.  
 
A good number of major corporations in Kenya have adopted and are domesticating the UN 
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, adopted by UN Human Rights Council in 2011 which have become a benchmark for their policies and programmes related to workplace and human rights. The Kenya Private Sector Alliance is also spearheading the Sustainable Inclusive Business (SIB) which has assisted businesses to measure and report on sustainability with a focus on the Sustainable Development Goals. It also brings knowledge, networks, studies, publications, trainings and expertise together and makes them accessible for the business community. There is an emerging trend among the business community to engage in economic activities that have a social and environmental dimension as it deals with an enlightened public.  
 
Challenges 
 
1. Although the country envisions an annual growth rate of 10% annually, it has been affected by constrained global trade aggravated by subdued investments at the global level  and  
2. The effects of climate change and the continuing drought and unfavourable weather have affected agriculture and agro based industries as well as the manufacturing sector. In addition, tourism share of GDP has remained low due to effects of transnational crimes and global terrorism.  
 
 
 
Goal 9: 	Build Resilient Infrastructure, Promote Inclusive and Sustainable   	 	Industrialization and Foster Innovation 
 
Kenya recognizes the critical role of infrastructure, industrialization and innovation in the achievement of the Kenya vision 2030. Efforts towards the development of these sectors have resulted in good progress towards these goals. The development of rural roads has seen the proportion of the rural population who live within 2 km of an all-season road increase to 30% translating to 13.2 million people as at 2015. 
 
Passenger and freight volumes, by mode of transport (000 tonnes) performed as follows: Railway freight increased from 1509 in 2014 to 1575 in 2015 before decreasing to 1429 in 2016; Air freight decreased from 279.9 to 263.6 in 2015 then to 250 in 2016; Water freight increased from 24875 to 26732 in 2015 and to 27364 in 2016; Passenger numbers (000 No.) were as follows: Railway decreased from 3845 to 2359 in 2015 and then to 2186 in 2016; Air increased from 8882 to 8993 in 2015 and to 10043 in 2016. The manufacturing value added as a percentage of GDP was estimated at 10.3 percent in 2014 but declined to 9.4 percent in 2015 and to 9.2 percent in 2016. Manufacturing value added per capita stood at 0.013 in 2014 and increased to 0.014 in 2016. 
 
The people employed in the manufacturing sector as a percentage of total employment was estimated at 11.9 percent in 2015 before decreasing slightly to 11.8 percent in 2016 while the proportion of population covered by mobile network, by technology was 94 in 2015 and increased slightly to 95 percent in 2016.The government has put in place a number of initiatives as outlined below. 
 
In Aviation, Kenya continued the expansion and modernization of aviation facilities. These include: uupgrading of Air Navigation Systems purchase of 3D Air Traffic Control Training Simulator at the East Africa School of Aviation (EASA); ongoing upgrading of airports; and the development and improvement of airstrips. The Jomo Kenyatta International Airport has been expanded and required infrastructure put in place to support direct flights to major international cities. Kenya has been granted category 1 status. Other airports and airstrips are being upgraded. 
 
Critical infrastructure within major towns and cities to address the growth in population and the resulting pressures on existing infrastructure is ongoing. These include construction of sewer lines, purchase of firefighting equipments and storm water drainage systems. 
 
Kenya endeavors to improve port efficiency by implementation of the Electronic Single 
Window System and the operationalization of the 24-hour port operations. The Kenya Tradenet System, an electronic single window system, has been launched. The System allows clients to lodge port clearance documents electronically through the System to the multiple government agencies involved in clearing cargo at the comfort of their offices. The System seamlessly integrates with the Integrated Customs Management System (ICMS) and Real Time Monitoring System (RTMS) which automates the One Stop Border Post (OSBP) processes for efficient and faster clearance of cargo at Kenyan Borders. The System reduces delays and lowers the costs of clearing goods at the Port and Kenyan borders. Kenya has also initiated improvement of maritime facilities including dredging and widening of Mombasa Port and development of container Berth. 
 	 
Construction of Standard Gauge Railway (SGR) phase I covering 500 Kms (Mombasa n Nairobi) is complete and is operational. The SGR system is slated to reduce the travel time between the two destinations from 12 to 4 hours and the cost of doing business in the region using rail is 40% cheaper than road transport. Construction of SGR phase 2 is in progress. To reduce traffic congestion within Nairobi, the Government has embarked on improvement of rail transport including upgrading of Commuter Rail System and construction of a railway station at Syokimau and Imara Daima, This has resulted in reliable and high capacity passenger and freight transport; reduced freight and passenger tariffs; decongested roads leading to savings in road maintenance and increase in employment opportunities  
 
To enhance connectivity, trade and security in South Sudan and Ethiopia, Kenya is currently developing the northern trade route. The Lamu Port South Sudan Ethiopia Transport (LAPSSET) Corridor Project is the largest integrated transformative infrastructure project in Africa.  The Project aims at opening up northern Kenya and providing a reliable transport corridor to Ethiopia, South Sudan and to some extent Uganda. The components of the Project are being implemented through PPP arrangements.  
 
In manufacturing sector, the Government has initiated efforts to enhance growth of SMEs through infrastructure development and financial support. During the period under review Kenya established the first leather park in Machakos County which aims at creating 35,000 jobs and generates USD 250 million to the GDP. In addition, the devolution of the industrial development function to sub national governments has greatly enhanced opportunities for increased industrial growth at the sub national level.  
 
To increase R&D workers and R&D spending as a proportion of the GDP, Kenya has put a number of measures in place. The enactment of the ST&I Act of 2013 has created three agencies namely: the National Commission for Science Technology and Innovation (NACOSTI), the Kenya National Innovation Agency (KENIA) and the National Research Fund (NRF) to streamline and enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the National System of Innovation (NSI) through clearly defined functions for each agency. KENIA is charged with managing the NSI to enhance linkages within the system among the government, academia and industry while the National Research Fund is charged with funding national research both in terms of supporting the performance of R&D in all sectors of the economy as well as providing infrastructure support to Universities and research institutions to upgrade their technological capabilities and enhance performance of R&D. 
 
The freeing up of valuable portions of the TV broadcast spectrum that emanated from the successful completion of the digital migration facilitated significant growth of digital TV stations from 36 in 2014 to 66 in 2016. This has benefited the consumers through more options, better sound and picture quality. 
 
The government has been undertaking regular measurement of Research and Experimental Development (R&D) and Innovation indicators since 2009 under the African Union NEPADled African Science Technology and Innovation Indicators (ASTII) Initiative. Under the ASTII initiative, R&D and Innovation indicators surveys are carried out biennially and triennially respectively. During the period under review, national R&D indicators survey and innovation survey were carried out in 2015/2016.  
 
The government is committed to creating a sustainable, world class technology hub to create the foundation for knowledge based economy, generating jobs and imparting digital skills. The development of infrastructure and stakeholder engagement at Konza Techno city is ongoing 
 
Challenges 
 
i. Inadequate funding for maintenance, rehabilitation and construction of new 
infrastructure;  
ii. Inadequate human resource capacity and equipment   
iii. High cost of infrastructural projects;  iv. 	High land acquisition costs and encroachment of road and railway reserves; and 
v. Rapid urbanization resulting in increased traffic volume, high cost/delays in relocation of utilities and services along and across road reserves. 
 
	Goal 10: 	Reduce Inequalities within and among countries 
 
Kenya has made progress in the following areas; produced a Migration Profile and a draft Migration Policy; Total resource flows for development (in Kshs. millions), was 28,117 in 2014 and increased to 51,470 in 2016. The completion of the Kenya External Resources Policy has provided adequate guidelines for the cooperation with development partners hence the possibility on increased external resources into the Country. 
 
Under the Intergovernmental Authority for Development, Regional Migration Policy 
Framework has established and operationalized the National Coordination Mechanism on Migration (NCMM). The NCMM is a platform for all government ministries, state departments and agencies to address migration related challenges in the country. In addition the Border Control Unit is expected to be institutionalized within the next five years and hence combine Customs and Immigration.  
 
The economic growth (GDP) experienced in the country since 1960s has not translated into significant reduction in poverty especially among the poor and many people continue to be excluded from basic social and economic benefits and opportunities for sustainable livelihoods.  
In response to citizensi demand for greater inclusion in social and economic benefits and opportunities for sustainable livelihoods, the government has been implementing specific interventions, targeting the most vulnerable sectors of the population. Such programs and  interventions are implemented by different stakeholders that include Government ministries and agencies, the private sector, communities, households, and other non-state actors.  
The constitutionally created Equalization Fund, aims at correcting the disadvantage of the previously marginalized areas. It is allocated one half percent of all revenue collection by the national government each year to provide basic services including water, roads health facilities and electricity to marginalized areas. It has ensured that regions with more development challenges receive more public resources as a way of catalyzing movement towards equality within regions and communities. Similarly the provision of free primary school education and tuition free secondary school as well the expansion of Technical and Vocational Educational Training (TVET) institutions to the village level, the Government of Kenya endeavors to ensure that children and pupils from poor backgrounds attain a decent education and life skills that equip them to compete with those from privileged backgrounds. 
 
Other programmes include Hunger and Safety Net Programme, Women Enterprise Fund, Youth Enterprise Development Fund, Affirmative Action Social Development Fund, National 
Government- Constituency Development Fund, UWEZO (Ability) Fund, Procurement Preferences and Reservations (30 per cent affirmative action policy for women, youth and persons with disabilities) in public procurement National Youth Services Capacity Building Initiatives and the Kenya Youth Empowerment Project (KYEP). These programmes aim at addressing the plight of the less disadvantaged in society, combat poverty, and promote equity. 
 
Huduma Kenya is a programme by the Government of Kenya that aims to transform Public 
Service Delivery by providing citizenis access to various Public Services and information from One Stop Shop citizen service centres called Huduma Centres and through integrated technology platforms. It provides Efficient Government Services at the convenience of the citizen. 
The ICT sector in Kenya has been growing at a very fast rate, mainly driven by the private sector. The government has made efforts to ensure that the ICTis business demand and supply sides are addressed. The government\0xEBs commitment to meet and fast track ICT development in the country was mainly through investing in the establishment of a conducive environment such as modern communication infrastructure. Kenya has effectively harnessed digital technologies for financial inclusion through the development and launch of the mobile money transfer 
 
Citizen participation in public policy decisions making including in the prioritization, planning, and ownership and, sustainability of sub national and national development is embedded in the constitution. Further, the Constitution in Article 201 (a) requires openness and unlimited accountability. As part of these processes the vulnerable and the poor should be fully and effectively involved in the countryis development agenda. The Ministry of Devolution and Planning has issued Public Participation. 
The government has been promoting reforms in the National Hospital Insurance Fund (NHIF) to make it one of the key drivers for achieving universal health coverage. The aim is to allow access to comprehensive health care for all including vulnerable persons, orphans and the elderly. This has resulted in improved access to high quality comprehensive health care at subsidized costs and enhanced access to healthcare by Kenyans particularly the vulnerable segments of the society. 
A number of private sector companies are providing income generating ventures such as direct farming contracts to youths and women groups. Others have highly resourced scholarship programmes that target needy and bright students for higher education. In the financial sector some companies have increased access to credit including where farmers can offer their animals as collateral and which is securitized through an insurance policy. 
 
Challenges 
 
1. Kenya as a developing country still encounters resource constraints in its desire to expand its social protection transfers; and  
2. The country has neighbors who have been unstable for a long time leading to illegal immigration as well as trafficking in persons and illegal fire arms which pose perpetual security concern in the country. 
 
Goal 11: 	Make Cities and Human Settlements Inclusive, Safe Resilient and   	 	Sustainable 
 
The proportion of urban population living in slums, informal settlements or inadequate housing stood at 7.9 percent in 2014. The total expenditure per capita (in Kshs.) spent on the preservation, protection and conservation of all cultural and natural heritage, by type of heritage level of government type of expenditure and type of private funding stood at 0.01.The number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000  people was 1 in 2014 before increasing to 2 in 2015 and then decreasing to 1 in 2016. The proportion of urban solid waste regularly collected and with adequate final discharge out of total urban solid waste generated, by cities was 44 percent in 2014. 
 
Kenya has undertaken measures to ensure sustainable cities and communities which include formulation and legislation of various policies and laws. The policy and legal frameworks are aimed at improving the sustainability of cities and urban settlements in line with the aspirations of Kenya Vision 2030. The government has also been constructing houses to improve on the living conditions of the police under annuity financing model. In 2006, National Disaster Reduction Strategy & Policy and National Disaster Preparedness and Response Strategies was adopted. 
  
The Government developed the National Solid Waste Management Strategy in 2015 as part of the efforts to promote environmental sustainability in our cities and other urban settlements. Other interventions include enhanced implementation of the National Climate Change Action Plan 2013-2017 through mainstreaming climate change into development of port facilities, roads, railways and bridges to account for rising sea levels and the increased occurrence of extreme weather events and flooding. The establishment of mass transit system for the Greater Nairobi in the form of bus rapid transit corridors, development of the Standard Gauge Rail is among low carbon transport options which will shift significant amount of freight from road to rail, improve passenger and freight vehicle efficiency. 
 
The Government made an investment of Kshs. 7.6 billion in 2016 in street lighting in all major towns in Kenya including all county headquarters. The programme is aimed at increasing security in major towns as well as creating employment opportunities and facilitates the realization of a 24-hr economy in these towns, urban and trading centres within the country. For ease of sustainability of the programme, the national government has implemented a 61.3 percent tariff reduction in charges to sub national government.  In addition, CCTVs cameras have been installed in Nairobi and Mombasa to help towards enhancing security and prevent crime. Similar projects are planned for implementation in other cities.  
The private sector contributes towards making cities and communities sustainable through the construction of more than 20,000 houses for both government and non-government employees through public private partnership model which, commenced in October 2016.  
 
Challenges 
 
i. High population growth rate; 
ii. Rapid urbanization; and 
iii. High cost of financing housing development, amongst others. 
 
	Goal 12: 	Ensure Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns 
 
In order to enhance efficiency in the use of natural resources and energy, the industrial sector has embraced cleaner production technologies through technical assistance by the Kenya National Cleaner Production Centre. The Centre has built capacity of industries in improving efficiency in the status of production systems/equipment in order to reduce wastage of raw materials and energy aimed at minimizing waste generation at source.   
 
The country has also pioneered the Green Economy Strategy initiatives that aim to support development efforts towards addressing key challenges such as poverty, unemployment, inequality, environmental degradation, climate change and variability, infrastructure gaps and food insecurity. A green growth path results in faster growth, a cleaner environment and high productivity. 
 
The minerals ad mining policy was developed and approved in 2016.The enactment of Mining Act 2016 and the development of 14 regulations necessary to operationalize this Act are in their final stages. In addition the Mining Policy 2016 has put sustainable mining at the core of all extractive industries.  
 
The private sector in Kenya is also championing sustainable consumption and production under the SWITCH Africa Green Project. Several companies have mainstreamed use of biodegradable materials in their production and consumption. On the other hand responsible consumption especially of habit-forming goods such as alcohol is being championed by the very same producers.   
 
Challenges 
 
i. Inadequate physical and social infrastructure in slums and informal settlements; 
ii. Rapid urbanization; 
iii. Rapid population growth; and iv. 	Proliferation of informal settlements. 
 
	Goal 13: 	Take Urgent Action to Combat Climate Change and its Impacts 
 
Climate change is considered one of the serious threats to sustainable development globally. Climate is a major driving factor for most of Kenyais economic activities and therefore high priority has been given to climate change and its impacts on livelihood and economic development. During the period under review, Kenya developed the National Disaster Reduction Strategy and Policy and National Disaster Preparedness and Response Strategies in 2016.  This has resulted in maintaining the low number of deaths, missing persons and persons affected by disaster per 100,000 people was 1 in 2014 before increasing to 2 in 2015 and then decreasing to 1 in 2016.  
 
Efforts that have been put in place by the Government on Strategies for disaster risk reduction (DRR) include: Establishment of National Drought Management Authority (NDMA) which is created through the Enactment of the National Drought Management Authority Act, 2016 and adoption of the 10 year Ending Drought Emergencies (EDE) Strategy covering the period, 2012-2022.   
 
.The Climate Change Act 2016 establishes the Climate Change Council which comprises stakeholders from National Government, sub national Governments, the private sector, civil society, communities and academia. The Act highlights the climate change response measures and actions, the roles of each of the stakeholders in mitigating effects of climate change and how to engage the public.  Kenya also ratified the Paris Agreement on Climate Change which took effect on 27th January 2017.  
 
The Forest Conservation and Management Act, 2016 provides for the conservation and management of public, community and private forests and, areas of forest land that require special protection. Forest play a critical role as Carbon dioxide (CO2) sink as well as building resilience to climate change. 
 
In support of the East Africa Community (EAC) Polythene Materials Control Bill, 2016 which proposes a total ban of plastic bags in the EAC countries. Kenya has already placed a total BAN on plastic bags with effect from August 2017. 
 
The Government is in the process of integrating climate change into the curriculum for primary and secondary levels of education. This is geared towards taking advantage of the current education curriculum review that is being undertaken by the Kenya Institute of Curriculums Development (KICD). Climate change will be mainstreamed in the current subjects and topics and not as a standalone topic. The Kenya School of Government has also developed a climate change curriculum and training manual that will be used to build capacity of both government and private sector on climate change mitigation, adaptation and finance. 
 
The private sector has set up, an incubation programme that supports the development and deployment of technologies that help communities to either mitigate against or adapt to climate change. So far, 138 enterprises have been incubated, 52 of which are now businesses that came in as ideas, and created 1,163 jobs through these businesses.  
 
Ecotourism Kenya is involved in Climate Change issues primarily through the Ecorating Certification Scheme, a voluntary scheme that covers accommodation facilities and basically advocates for the sustainable use of resources to reduce negative impacts on the environment and to use the dwindling resources in a more equitable manner. 
 
Challenges 
i. Lack of reliable and adequate data on climate issues 
ii. Lack of baseline data to measure the progress on implementation of the SDGs in the environment sector. 
iii. Low Investment in climate Change research 
Goal 14:  	Conserve and sustainably use the Oceans, Seas and Marine Resources for Sustainable Development 
 	 
The concept of blue economy is now adopted to guide policy making and investment so as to ensure economic development of the ocean contributes to true prosperity for the current and future generations. In Kenya, Coast Development Authority (CDA) is mandated to provide integrated development planning, coordination and implementation of projects and programmes within the coast region. The Kenyais EEZ and adjacent environment is well endowed with unique Coastal resources that include the sea, rivers, springs, lakes, deltas, water catchments, hills and rangelands, marine resources, fisheries, tree crops, forestry (mangroves), Kayas, minerals (gemstones), wildlife (Hirola, butterflies), tourism, diverse cultures, monuments and history.  
CDA has been addressing development challenges in the coast region by employing participatory, multi-sectoral and integrated development approach that considers all related factors in sustainable utilization and management of the natural resources for the regionis economic development.  
During the period under review, progress was made in the following areas; the proportion of fish stocks (in tonnes) within biologically sustainable levels decreased from 168,413 in 2014 to 144,325 in 2015 and further to 128,645 in 2016. The coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas was 10% in 2014. The government has undertaken various measures to fast track this goal. 
 
Government efforts to protect the forest which are the major water towers resulted into increased water volumes especially in the rift valley lakes leading to increase in fish stocks especially in Lake Naivasha  
 
Three mini fish processing and cold storage facilities which provide diverse services including cold storage, value addition and marketing of farmed fish have been constructed. In addition, ten aquaculture products marketing outlets in various parts of the country have been established in collaboration with private fish vendors. The establishment of a fish quality laboratory is expected to facilitate the capacity to conduct the full spectrum of fish tests required to access the European and other high quality markets.    
 
Promotion of local deep sea companies through joint ventures, reflagging of foreign fishing vessels and chartered fishing vessels is one of the countryis strategies in developing the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ}. Towards this end, a deep sea fishing fleet development plan for a total of 73 deep sea fishing vessels have been developed and lodged with the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission. 
 
To facilitate the landing of the catch by the deep sea fishing vessels on the Kenyan soil, the Government has identified three berths designated for the fish port under the Lamu Port Southern Sudan - Ethiopia Transport (LAPSSET) corridor Flagship Project. 
 
The Government enacted Fisheries Management and Development Act 2016 and also continue to enforce controls for exploitation of fisheries resources. The Act provides for the conservation, management and development of fisheries and other aquatic resources and seeks to enhance the livelihood of communities that depend on fishing. The Act gives guidance on importation and exportation of fish and fish products, fish quality and safety. 
 
Challenges 
 
i. Lack of baseline data on marine life and environment management; and 
ii. Evasive and alien species that threaten indigenous species by way of predation, alteration of habitat or disruption of ecosystem processes. The prevention, control and elimination of these species is a big challenge in environmental management efforts; In adequate resources. 
 
Goal 15: Protect, Restore and Promote Sustainable use of Terrestrial Ecosystems, Sustainably Manage Forests, Combat Desertification, and Halt and Reverse Land Degradation and Halt Biodiversity Loss 
 
The Government enacted the Forest Conservation and Management Act 2016 to guide the sustainable exploitation of forest resources. In addition, a number of initiatives were undertaken, and include: Natural forest conservation through rehabilitation of 600,000 ha of the five major water towers. Tree planting was carried out on 403,034 ha of farms and dry lands. In addition, 21,031.6 ha of industrial forest plantations and 40,987 ha of commercial forest woodlots were established during the period. Further, 150,000 ha of farm and private commercial forestry and 2,649 ha of nature based enterprises (non-wood forest products) were established to increase forest cover. The proportion of forest area in the total land area was 5.96 percent in 2015. 
 
In forestry research and development, six high value on-farm tree species were identified; four new commercial tree products were produced and seasonal tree species were distributed to all counties. Green Schools and Commercial Tree Growing for a Green Economy programme was established. The Bamboo Development and Commercialization Strategy (2014-2017), Green Economy Assessment Report and Sustainable Environmental and Restoration Programme were launched. 
 
Several initiatives were further undertaken to reclaim the degraded land. Among the initiatives include: Reclamation of the 50,000 ha by sub national governments. A total of 1,331 ha. of degraded land was reclaimed in Turkana, West Pokot and Garissa counties. As a result of the construction of 3,700 water conservation and harvesting structures, an additional 5,200ha were reclaimed during the period under review.  
 
The private sector contribution towards this goal includes a programme that encourages and enables schools to participate in environmental activities by developing small forests and woodlots within their compounds for multiple benefits. 
 
Review of regulations on EMCA Act, Forest conservation and Management 2016 and, Wildlife Conservation and Management 2016 sets the best implementation methodology. Development of eighteen wildlife regulations forms a long term solution to benefit sharing and corridors ownership. 
 
 
Challenges 
 
i. Inadequate institutional capacities; 
ii. Lack of participatory coordination frameworks in land and forestry management which allow joint planning, monitoring and reporting by key stakeholders,  
iii. Insufficient funding;  iv. Illegal logging, charcoal burning and opening up of lands for farming;  
v. Low sewerage coverage and insufficient treatment of effluent; and  
vi. Natural calamities and resource based conflicts. 
 
Goal 16: 	Promote Peaceful and Inclusive Societies for Sustainable Development, Provide Access to Justice for all and Build Effective, Accountable and Inclusive Institutions at all levels 
 
Progress has been made in the following areas; the number of victims of intentional homicide per 100,000 population was 6 by 2014. In 2016, the total number of homicide cases stood at 2,751while.the unsentenced detainees as a proportion of overall prison population stood at 55.9% in 2014 and increased to 60.5% in 2016.The proportion of seized small arms and light weapons that are recorded and traced, in accordance with international standards and legal instruments was 392 in 2014 and declined to 331 in 2015. In 2016, total firearms recovered stood at 444 while the number of rounds of ammunition of recovered and surrendered were 4,711. 
 
As part of adopting and implementing constitutional, statutory and/or policy guarantees for public access to information, Kenya is implementing the 2010 Constitution. According to Article 35 of the constitution, every citizen has the right of access to information held by the State and by another person and required for the exercise or protection of any right or fundamental freedom. The country also adopted the Paris Principles and formed Kenya National Human Rights and Equality Commissions which are independent national human rights institutions, enshrined in the Constitution of Kenya. 
 
The Government continued to implement various institutional reforms to improve Governance in 2016. The reforms included: vetting of police officers, installation of a national secure communication network and surveillance system for the National Police Service (NPS) in Nairobi and Mombasa, and introduction of a \0xEBRoadmap Toolkiti to guide training of police officers. During the same period, additional armored vehicles as well as transport trucks were procured to enhance capacity of the police to respond to emerging security threats. Additional police officers and reservists were recruited. Te current police civilian ratio stands at 1,380 against 1,450 United Nation guide. 
 
The country has made progress in promotion of peace nationally, regionally and internationally by establishing institutional bodies like National Cohesion and Integration Commission (NCIC), Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission (EACC), Kenya National Human Rights and Equality Commission, Kenya National Gender and Equality Commission. Regionally, Kenya has participated in various peace keeping missions and support operations like Somalia Peace Keeping Missions. In August 2016, Kenya passed Access to Information (ATI) legislation aimed at fostering transparency in government and underlines the Governmentis willingness to enhance citizen engagement, transparency and accountability. 
 
The Government has also put in place mechanisms to foster peace among warring communities through initiatives like joint Cultural Festivals, signed treaties on cultural exchange programmes with 51 countries hosting Kenya Missions. The treaties focus on promotion of cultural tourism, peace and human understanding among others. Kenya is the chair of InterCountry Quality Nodes on peace education in Africa. 
 
Kenya seeks to establish effective peace and conflict structures throughout the country. During the review period, Kenya implemented a number of initiatives to achieve this goal which include: Sessional Paper No. 5 of 2014 on Peace building and Conflict Management in Kenya. It was adopted by the National Assembly in August 2015; Peace structures have been set up at all levels within government and communities to coordinate peace building and conflict management initiatives, develop and implement intervention strategies; Engagement with the political leadership has been sustained to seek their support in the peace agenda; Both national and sub national governments are supporting the implementation of the KNAP on UNSCR 1325 on Women, Peace building and Security through engendering peace processes. 
 
To promote partnerships and mutual cooperation, Kenya is participating in cross-border meetings and other tripartite arrangements such as EAC, IGAD/CEWARN and bilateral, cross-border peace dialogues with neighbouring countries are held regularly to address conflict issues. The Government with the support of development partners is implementing peace dividend projects to support peace initiatives geared towards weaning communities from violence and enabling them use their energies in building peace.  
 
The private sector initiated a peace campaign project meant to foster peaceful coexistence and peace for economic growth and prosperity in the country. This initiative is spearheaded by Kenya Private Sector Alliance (KEPSA) bringing together the Private Sector, Civil Society, Religious Leaders, Political Leaders, Student Leaders and Governments. 
 
To ensure increased access to justice for the vulnerable members of the society and persons with disability, the government is implementing an effective legal aid scheme hinged on the constitutional requirement. Towards this, the legislative vehicle for legal aid through the National Legal Aid Act 2016 has been enacted.  
 
The Mkenya Daima initiative is designed to have positive impact on peace in the country especially during and after elections. It will ensure immediate positives impact on economic growth of the country as businesses are not interrupted every time there is an election.  
 
Challenges 
 
i. Local, regional and international terrorism threats;  
ii. Inadequate resources; 
iii. High number of refugees due to regional conflicts; iv. 	Radicalization of the youth;  
v. Cyber-crime;  
vi. High youth unemployment breeding crime; and 
vii. Transnational and trans-border crime and networks. 
 
	Goal 17: 	Strengthen Means of Implementation and Revitalize the Global  
Partnership for Sustainable Development 
 
In 2016, the total government revenue as a proportion of GDP was 23.4% while the proportion of domestic budget funded by domestic taxes was 60.7%. The volume of remittances (in USD) as a proportion of total GDP accounted for 2.47% in 2016. In the same year, the debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services stood contributed 7.5%.The Fixed internet broadband subscription per 100 inhabitants was 64.9%; the proportion of individuals using the internet stood at 86.7%. In order to ensure quality and adequate data on SDGs, Kenya is focusing on strengthening national statistical office, the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics. The policy priority of the Kenya Government is to strengthen the National Statistical System to support planning, and monitoring and evaluation of government policies and programmes. The Kenya National Bureau of Statistics (KNBS) is therefore, expected to generate official statistics that are comprehensive, reliable, timely and disaggregated up to the sub national level. Towards this end, the Bureau has established offices in each of the 47 counties to coordinate statistical capacity building programmes at the sub national level and ensure that international standards are applied in the production and dissemination of county statistics 
 
The government is also rolling out National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System 
(NIMES) and fast-tracking implementation of electronic Project Monitoring Information System (e-promis) to provide a non-stop information portal where information is easily and readily available. 
 
Kenya has over the recent years undertaken multiple reforms to enhance the trade and international cooperation. This is also well reflected in the Kenya Vision 2030 which recognizes the central role played by the global trade to Kenya. These reforms include: enhancing wholesale hubs retail markets and; exploration of new markets to enhance Kenya trade portfolio among others.. Kenya is on record in leading calls for the eliminations of non-tariff trade barriers which act as key hurdles in the growth of exports from developing countries.  
 
Kenya has also hosted a number of international conventions aimed at strengthening global partnerships such as the HLM2, Tokyo International Conference on Africa Development(TICAD) IV conference, the United Nations Conference on Trade And Development 14 conference, the regional consultations on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Africais Agenda 2063 amongst others. A foreign policy is also in place. 
 
The government is committed to creating a sustainable, world class technology hub to create the foundation for knowledge based economy, generating jobs and imparting digital skills. The development of infrastructure and stakeholder engagement at Konza Techno city is ongoing The government is leveraging on the fast growing technology sector to deliver on SDGs. Huduma Kenya is a programme by the Government of Kenya that aims to transform Public Service Delivery by providing citizenis access to various Public Services and information from One Stop Shop citizen service centres called Huduma Centres and through integrated technology platforms. It provides Efficient Government Services at the convenience of the citizen. Kenya has effectively harnessed digital technologies for financial inclusion through the development and launch of the mobile money transfer service. 
 
The government has developed National Capacity Building Framework to re-position the public service to improve service levels and ensure a citizen-centric service delivery approach. The Council of Governors (the representative body of all governors in the country) is also involved in capacity building of SDGs at the devolved level in collaboration with the National Government.  He planning and budgetary officers at the sub national level have been trained. Emphasis has been given to the Training of Trainers (TOTs) who will train others in their respective institutions. 
 
The Private Sector, CSOs, development partners will continue to play a pivotal role in the implementation of SDGs in the true spirit of leaving no-one behind 
 	 
 
 	 

6.0 	NATIONAL MECHANISMS FOR MONITORING PROGRESS AND  	REPORTING ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ACHIEVEMENT  	OF SDGS  
 
Monitoring and evaluation is important during implementation of the SDGs. The SDGs being considerably larger than the MDGs implies that assessing progress towards the SDGs will rely on an even more elaborate system of measurement, covering more sectors and more indicators. Therefore there is need to put in place a robust SDGs monitoring and evaluation framework which will cover all the activities that contribute to the achievements of the SDGs. This framework should be inclusive and provide for multi stakeholder participation from local through to national levels. It should also have coordinated interventions to strengthen statistical capacities to collect collate and analyze national and sub national data.  
The government is responsible for tracking and reviews of the SDGs. This will be done at both the national and sub national levels. At the national level, monitoring and evaluation of policies, projects and programmes outlined in MTP is done through National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (NIMES) which was established in 2004. It employs a result based monitoring framework and provides important feedback to policy makers and the general public on the national governmentis performance.  
At sub national level, tracking progress towards the achievement of the policies, projects and programmes outlined in each CIDP will be undertaken through the County Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (CIMES). The ministry of devolution and planning has developed guidelines to provide basic principles for designing a clear CIMES for sub national level monitoring. This multi level monitoring and evaluation system will be used for monitoring the SDGs in the country. For effective monitoring of the SDGs, the National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System (NIMES) will be aligned with SDGs and the second National Indicator handbook for monitoring MTP II will be expanded to cover all relevant SDGs indicators. The SDGs indicators will also be integrated in regular surveys. It will also ensure engagement of stakeholders. Emphasis will be paid to building capacity of the national Statistical System to ensure data availability and credibility. 
	7.0 	MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION 
 
The Constitution of Kenya requires public participation in key governance and policy formulation processes. By providing for public participation, the citizens are empowered and made aware of their roles and responsibilities to enable them to participate in deciding on their destiny.  
 
Lessons learnt from MDGs implementation indicate that it is not enough to acknowledge inability or ability to attain set targets but call for deepening dialogue, candid actions and bold steps on resource mobilization, allocation and utilization geared towards the identified initiatives. The lessons will form the foundation for the SDGs implementation if any development challenges are to be surmounted. More importantly, it has to include a renegotiation of the roles and relationships between national, sub national governments, between Government and Development Partners, members of legislative assemblies (national and county) and between state and non-state actors among others. Therefore, strong partnerships and collaboration amongst stakeholders is critical in the successful implementation of the SDGs. A strong collaboration will ensure creation of synergies which are necessary in implementation of the SDGs. Given the universality of the SDGs, it is critical that all relevant stakeholders are involved in the implementation of the SDGs at the national and sub national levels in Kenya. Therefore, one important first step that Kenya has undertaken is the mapping of all relevant stakeholders who will be involved in the implementation of the SDGs. This is important for translating 17 SDGs into action. 
 
On data and statistics knowledge-sharing, technology and partnerships, the Kenya National Bureau of Statistics is mandated by the Statistics Act 2006 to supervise and coordinate the National Statistics System (NSS). A challenge facing the NSS is limited statistical capacity and adoption of technology and innovation. The NSS will require to be expanded to incorporate non-state actors in order to create the necessary synergies to trigger new data collection tools and technologies for SDG monitoring frameworks, consequently, it is crucial that technical and financial support is provided to the Bureau to effectively supervise and coordinate the NSS.  
 
In particular, specific areas of focus in strengthening statistical capacities in Kenya are:  
 
a) Training of Ministries, Departments and Agencies, including Counties, on basic statistics and management of information, particularly administrative data; 
b) Technical assistance to the National Statistical Office and National Statistical System on imputation of the indicators and sharing of methodologies involved, including adoption of small area technology; 
c) Knowledge sharing, between international and national statistics agencies, on the indicators where methodology is still non-existent (Tier 111); 
d) Incorporation of key stakeholders, including CSOs, in the SDGs data debate through the existing national technical statistics committees. This will enhance availability, accessibility and harmonization of data produced in the country; 
e) Technical and financial support in conducting  SDGs related surveys, further analysis of existing surveys and censuses to derive baseline information for the SDGs; 
f) Effective coordination of big data (large/complex datasets) from non-official data sources; and 
g) Collaboration with private sector and international agencies to develop geospatial databases. 
 
Challenges 
 
1. Inadequate capacity 
2. High stakeholder expectations 
3. Inadequate funding to implement the SDGs 
4. Inadequate disaggregated data 
 
	8.0 	NEXT STEPS 
 
a. Intensified awareness creation and capacity building to position country governments as the SDGs implementers; 
b. Mainstreaming of SDGs into the MTP III, second generation County Integrated 
Development Plans and public institutions strategic plans; 
c. Review the National Statistical System (NSS) in light of the SDGs;. 
d. Capacity assessment of both National and sub national Governments to achieve the 
SDGs; 
e. Incorporation of SDGs targets and indicators into performance contracting in the 
Public Sector; 
f. Needs assessment and costing analysis of the public sector to deliver on the SDGs; and 
g. Prepare and finalize an engagement framework between Government and Non State Actors on the SDGs. 
 
	9.0 	CONCLUSION 
 
The SDGs came at a favorable time for Kenya as the Agenda 2030 time framework overlaps with that of Kenya Vision 2030. This has enabled the country to easily mirror its National Development Plans and Programme with those of the SDGs. In addition, the timing of the SDGs also coincides with the completion of the Kenya Integrated Household and Budget Survey 2016. This is particularly useful as the data and information generated will provide a clear baseline for the SDGs agenda and thus more effective tracking, monitoring and evaluation of the targets and indicators. 
 
With the Kenya Constitution 2010 and its elaborate bill of rights guaranteed for the citizens, the SDGs era presents a great challenge for the Government and other Non-State development actors to work harder than in the past. However, devolution which was designed to take services closer to the people offers a new fit for development for Kenya and more effective service delivery channels for development. 
 
This Voluntary National Review has been conducted at an opportune time when Kenya is s preparing the next generation of the Kenya Vision 2030 Medium Term Plan III and the County Integrated Development Plans. The review has provided useful information that feeds into the preparation of the two planning documents. The process of review has been collaborative involving the Government, Civil Society organizations, and Private sector as well as development partners a clear indication that the government is engaging other stakeholders in the SDGs process and this will continue. The progress made in the achievement of the goals and targets shows that Kenya is really committed to implement the agenda 2030. Although data gaps and other vital information exist, stakeholders agree that the review is a demonstration of Kenyais willingness to meet its international obligations on the development front.   
 