	 	 	 	 	 	 	41
1. BRIEF COUNTRY INFORMATION

The Republic of Tajikistan is a landlocked country in Central Asia, with more than 93 percent of the territory covered by mountains. The population of the country is 8.7 million people, of which more than 49 percent are women. 40.6 percent of citizens are children under the age of 18, 66 percent are young people under 30, which make the population of Tajikistan one of the youngest in Central Asia. By area Tajikistan is the 85th country in the world, and has large reserves of hydropower resources and fresh water, a variety of minerals, favorable conditions for the cultivation of environmentally friendly food products, as well as opportunities for active development of ecological tourism, which corresponds to the fundamental provisions of human development in the context of access to natural resources.
As of 2015, Tajikistan ranks 65th in the 
1
Human Capital Index, 129th in the 
Human Development Index, 69th in the Gender Inequality Index, 114th in the Global Innovation Index.  As of 2016, in the Global Competitiveness Index, the country ranks 77th and 132nd in the "Doing Business 2016" rating.
According to the Gender Gap Score, Tajikistan ranks 93rd out of 144 countries (2016), including, in the rating of ensuring the equality of women and men in economic life, the country is on the 47th place, on access to education of women - at 118th place, on healthcare opportunities - at 126th place.
In 2015, Tajikistan ranked 72nd out of 180 countries in the Environmental Performance Index (EPI), rising by 82 positions in comparison with the results of 2014.
It is critical to underscore that Tajikistan was included in the list of 10 countries with the fastest rate of poverty reduction in the last 15 years.
2. SUMMARY
In 2017, Tajikistan initiated the preparation of the Voluntary National Review (VNR) in the country for presentation at the High-Level Political Forum (HLPF).
The primary goal of the Review is the analysis of the implementation of the SDGs at the country level, mainstreaming of the Agenda 2030 into national development policies through the broad participation of all stakeholders. The main objective of the Review is to share experiences, including successes, challenges, and lessons learned, in order to accelerate the implementation of the Agenda 2030. The Review aims to strengthen policies of the government and institutions to mobilize support and partnerships for SDG implementation involving various stakeholders.
The subject of the Review concerns issues of poverty eradication through improving living standards of the country's population.
2
This Review examines the process of the SDG nationalization through the achievement of two strategic development goals of the country identified in the National Development Strategy for the period up to 2030 (NDS2030): 1) ensuring energy security and efficient use of electricity; and 2) ensuring food security and access of population to quality nutrition. Other SDG objectives are also reflected in the 
Review as inter-sectoral issues: gender equality, industrialization, access to safe drinking water, climate change issues and others.
The Review was prepared based on a series of consultations at the national levels, with the participation of all stakeholders: experts from governmental, sectoral, and local territorial bodies, UN agencies, representatives of parliament, civil society, academia, entrepreneurs, and mass media, as well as representatives of development partners in Tajikistan. The depth of the Review deals with the processing of information from official statistics, current data of ministries and agencies, reports and reviews of international organizations, expert reviews, monitoring results of regional development programs, information from international sources, etc.
The key instruments for the SDG mainstreaming into the national development policy are the adopted NDS-2030 and MTDP-2020. At the same time, today Tajikistan faces the tasks of rolling-out the SDG into sectoral policies and localizing the SDGs at the regional level.
NDS-2030 plays a role of the main strategy of the country around which the SDG implementation is organized.


VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW - 2017   |
3.1. National mechanism for SDG nationalization

In 2016, Tajikistan developed and adopted the National Development Strategy for the period up to 2030 (NDS2030). NDS-2030 sets the highest goal of long-term development of the country to improve the living standards and wellbeing of the population based on sustainable economic development. This highest goal should be achieved by implementing four strategic goals of the country's development for the next 15 years: (1) ensuring energy security and efficient use of electricity; (2) moving out of the communication deadlock and the transformation of the country into a transit country; (3) ensuring food security and access of population to 
5	quality nutrition; and (4) expanding productive employment.
There is a direct and intersectoral relationship between the NDS 2030 and the SDGs, which is an inclusive approach to addressing existing problems and challenges. It is worth noting that the SDG nationalization is a very complex process, which implies a deep relationship with the goals and objectives of the NDS 2030.
The SDG nationalization mechanism through the NDS 2030 provides for a comprehensive implementation of measures and activities. As already mentioned, one of the priorities of longterm development for Tajikistan are the issues of food security, quality of nutrition and development of agriculture. The issues of food security are multifaceted and, accordingly, have multisectoral specifics. Opportunities for addressing issues related to SDG 2 are laid in the creation of favorable investment conditions, using the resources of both domestic and foreign investments, which will be instrumental in creating opportunities for the development of small and medium-sized businesses. Nutrition quality issues, in turn, affect healthy lifestyles and issues within SDG 3, especially for children and vulnerable groups of population.
For the development of agriculture in the country, agricultural production should develop, which, with limited land resources, is directly linked to the development of energy within the SDG 7.  Energy issues are given special attention in the NDS 2030; therefore, they are associated not only with building up energy potential, but also with efficient use of existing capacities. Achieving these goals is problematic without addressing the issues of industrialization, innovation, and infrastructure within the SDG 9.
In turn, the tasks in the framework of infrastructure development are closely interrelated with country's moving out from the communication deadlock and turning Tajikistan into a transit country, as reflected in NDS 2030. In addition, infrastructural changes involve addressing problems and other SDGs, including the water sector, economic growth and job creation, issues related to production development, climate change, addressing gender issues, etc.
Within the framework of issues related to climate change, Tajikistan is currently developing the National strategy for adaptation to climate change, which will allow the introduction of adaptation measures in the country's development planning process.
The issues of the water sector, where Tajikistan is one of the initiators of the discussion at the global level, should be singled out separately. The Water Forum meetings were held in the country, where took part representatives of different countries, international organizations, UN agencies.  In this regard, the NDS 2030 pays attention to both improving the population's access to drinking water and providing water for agricultural needs.
VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW - 2017   |
Education issues remain important for 
Tajikistan. Despite the fact that Tajikistan has achieved a high level of school enrollment, it is necessary to pay special attention to the quality of education, at all levels.
In the framework of the main objectives for Tajikistan, there remain issues of justice and corruption, which are closely related to SDG 16 and the foundation of effective institutions. In this direction, Tajikistan made some progress, which needs to be increased further especially since without the founding effective state institutions, it is problematic to achieve results on the strategic goals and objectives defined in the NDS 2030.
Thus, the NDS-2030 will serve as the main mechanism around which the nationalization and direct 
implementation of the SDGs will be organized. Implementation of the SDGs 	6
will be ensured through the implementation of three five-year medium-term development programs. 
For practical application of SDGs and 
NDS-2030, the Medium-term 
Development Program for the period 
2016-2020 was developed and adopted (MDP-2020). It contains the main activities for achieving the first phase of the implementation of the NDS-2030 and the SDGs.



3.2. Methodology
The methodology of the presented Review is based on the requirements and rules of the UN and ECOSOC and includes an assessment of the level of the country's achievements in the field of nationalization of the SDGs.
The Review was prepared based on broad consultations at the national level, with the participation of designated and responsible experts of the state and sectoral institutions, representatives of parliament, civil society, and academia, as well as representatives of development partners in Tajikistan. The depth of the Review concerns processing of official statistics, current data of ministries and agencies, reports and reviews of international organizations, expert reviews and evaluations, regional development programs.
8
For the preparation of the Review, sources from different levels were used, of which the following should be singled out: Results of implementation of the National Development Strategy for the period until 2015; the development priorities identified in the NDS-2030 and the MDP-2020; international initiatives of Tajikistan in the field of use of water resources; data of reviews and reports of international organizations; national statistics data, data from sectoral ministries and agencies, reports and reviews of the UN agencies and other international organizations.
The main facilitation agency in preparing the VNR is the Ministry of Economic Development and Trade (MEDT). To prepare the VNR, a working group was created from among the experts of ministries and agencies. The UN agencies, development partners, representatives of civil society, scientists and others contributed to the process of discussion and introduction of thematic information. It is also worth noting that the UN agencies actively participated in the preparation of the Review and provided consultative assistance to the working group.
As part of the preparation of the Review, discussions were held relating to the topics of this year's HLPF and the relationship with development vectors under the NDS-2030. In particular, the issues of food security and quality of nutrition, energy and the water sector were considered separately. After the completion of each thematic discussion, the MEDT received additional comments on sectors and directions from all stakeholders that were included in the final document.
4. ACHIEVEMENTS
Achievements in the field of sustainable development at the initial stage of their implementation are linked to achievements that are marked by the results of the MDGs. However, not all of the goals under the MDGs have been achieved, which is why they were moved to Agenda 2030.
In this regard, progress in achieving the 
9
MDGs in Tajikistan was significant, but uneven. The goals related to the eradication of extreme poverty (MDG 1), education (MDG 2) and the global partnership (MDG 8) have largely been achieved. The main achievement of Tajikistan over the past 15 years has been the poverty reduction. From 2000 to 2016, the poverty rate declined from 83% to 30.3%.

The analysis of monetary poverty shows that deprivation was higher for the population in the lower 40% of the distribution of consumption than for those who are in the upper 60%. At the same time, between 2005 and 2010, the growth rate of household income per capita among the poorest 40% of the population grew by 1.5% in relation to the population as a whole. The multidimensional poverty index (MPI) shows that about 7.8% of the population at the national level live at the level of multidimensional poverty, and the vulnerability to multidimensional poverty reaches more than 20% (7.6% and 25% in urban and rural areas, respectively).
Poverty eradication is still an urgent issue, and the achievement of the set goals in the next 15 years underlies the changing approaches to addressing poverty issues through addressing food security, food quality and safety, energy security, water sector issues, climate change, other SDGs, affecting the standard of living and well-being of the population.
According to national statistics, between 
10
2000 and 2015, life expectancy in 
Tajikistan increased from 68.2 (women - 70.3 and men - 66.1) to 73.6 years (Figure 2).

The growth of this indicator indicates a reduction in mortality rate although the level of maternal and infant mortality remains high compared to other countries.
Virtually the full coverage of primary education was achieved, which was 99% as shown in Figure 3.

Coverage of children with primary educa on in Tajikistan




Forest area, 2011=100%


12
The population's access to drinking water and sanitation has improved. The access of the population of cities and districts of the country to drinking water increased from 48.6% in 2010 to 57.7% in 2016. 
     Trends of access to improved source of drinking water by households (Percentage of households with the access to improved source of drinking water) sanitation have improved within the require large financial investments.
water sector issues, however, they have 
The access of the rural population to drinking water today is 47.6%.  The access of the population to improved sources of drinking water increased from 57% in 2000 (according to MLCR 2 data) to 76% in 2012 (according to the MDRT).

Tajikistan, as a member of the panel on the water sector at the global level, is also a supporter and participant in the process of implementing the principles of integrated water resources management (IWRM), based on the Millennium Development Goals.  A full transition to IWRM is part of the Johannesburg Plan, supported by the Republic of Tajikistan.  IWRM contributes to effective water management, its steady supply to consumers, the actual equality of all water users and sustainable development in the country.
13
At the same time, environmental problems and vulnerability remain extremely important, especially in the context of climate change. The issues of climate change are on the agenda at the highest level in Tajikistan, and the initiation by the Government of the country of the inclusion of the problem of melting glaciers in the international agenda confirms that. The infant, child, and maternal mortality rates have decreased, but slower than necessary. 
Over the past five years, the maternal mortality rate at birth has decreased by 1.6 and the child mortality rate by 2.5 times. 
In the country in 2016, the infant mortality rate was 15.8 per 1,000 live births (in 2015 - 16.6), and for children under five the mortality rate was 20.1 (in 2015 - 20.7).  The maternal mortality rate in 2015 was 32 per 1,000 (this indicator is 70 per 1,000 for the MDGs).
Within the framework of MDG 6, due to the common actions and participation of the international community, the result of combating malaria was fully achieved. If in 2006, there were 17 cases per 100 thousand of population, in recent years this ratio has decreased to single cases.

Malaria incidence (per 100,000 people)



VOLUNTARY NATIONAL REVIEW - 2017   |
It is worth noting that the number of 	provision of public services, raise Internet users in the country is growing, 	people's awareness. Addressing this but remains at a low level compared to 	problem depends on various factors, other countries (Fig. 10). 	including better access of the population and business to a constant The development of the Internet will 	source of energy, especially in rural create conditions for improving the 	areas.
Internet users in Tajikistan (Percentage of popula on)

15	In 2007-2015, expenditures from the state budget for health care increased 6.3 times.  At present, the total government expenditures for health care make 2.1% of GDP, which is comparable to that of countries with a similar GDP per capita.
Tajikistan has improved in addressing the issues of gender inequality and discrimination, by adopting an effective policy and legal-regulatory framework. At the same time, in the field of gender equality (MDG 3), progress was mixed. Today, the HDI value, taking into account the inequality, is 0.532. The total loss from inequality is 15.2%.
Inequality in life expectancy, in education and income are 23.2, 6.5, and 15 points, respectively. Premature mortality from non-communicable 
Fig. 10.
diseases (cardiovascular diseases, cancer, diabetes, chronic respiratory diseases) by gender is 58% for men and 49% for women (2012). 10% of households headed by women make up the bottom 40% of poor families.
The country's experience in implementing the MDGs, as well as the recent adoption of the NDS-2030 (with efforts to bring it in line with the SDGs), show that Tajikistan holds a good position to reach the SDGs.  Following the international commitments of Tajikistan on the SDGs, it is planned to follow the principle of inclusiveness in NDS-2030, which takes into account the needs and representation in the development processes of all groups of population (by gender, age, disability, social status, place of residence, ethnicity, etc.).



5. PROBLEMS AND SITUATION

In the transition to the SDGs, a number of MDGs targets remain incomplete. The Government of Tajikistan is firmly committed to realizing the set objectives through the nationalization of the SDGs, primarily through the prism of achieving the country's strategic development goals as defined in the NDS-2030.
In this regard, the priority of energy security is obvious: if Tajikistan will not provide it, there will be no possibility to implement sustainable development plans.
17
According to the specific indicators of the hydropower potential per one square kilometer of the area and per capita Tajikistan holds the first and second places in the world respectively.  In terms of the use of resources of production of "green power, the country is the sixth in the world. 
Infrastructure quality in Tajikistan (1-7, best of all)

Accordingly, the production of "green power fairly objectively fits into the concept of sustainable development. Such a potential for the production of clean energy requires the acceleration of the Government's adopted course on developing hydropower resources to ensure socio-economic development, improving the living standards and wellbeing of the population, and reducing poverty. The implementation of priority hydropower projects and, on this basis, the effective use of water and energy resources make it possible to ensure the country's energy security and lay a stable foundation for ensuring the quality of infrastructure, industrialization and innovation (SDG 9).
Hydropower industry is a key source of power supply for Tajikistan's population and national economy. The development of large-scale capacity hydropower industry in the Republic of Tajikistan for the future can be significant, where there are more than 80 selected and surveyed dam locations for the construction of large hydroelectric power stations only.  This primarily concerns the completion of the construction of the Rogun hydroelectric power station, which will allow not only to address the problem of electricity shortage, but also to solve a number of social problems, primarily related to ensuring human rights protection for access to energy, job creation and production development. The issues of the development of Tajikistan's energy sector, which include the construction of large as well as medium and small hydropower stations, are not only economically relevant, but also vital, playing a key role in maintaining independence and reducing poverty in the country, creating conditions for human development potential through the access to normally functioning sectors of the economy, housing-communal and sanitary-hygienic services and a healthy lifestyle.
On this basis, Tajikistan attaches exceptional importance to ensuring energy security through the development and expansion of large, medium, and small hydropower stations.
18
Modern realities are such that the shortage of electricity not only limits the country's opportunities for economic growth and efforts to reduce poverty, but is also the main reason for environmental degradation. From these positions, hydropower industry is seen not only as a basis for achieving energy security, ensuring environmental sustainability, but also as a prerequisite for achieving the "green" growth.
The construction of large, medium, and small hydropower stations in Tajikistan is also of great importance as a support tool for the Kyoto Protocol to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the Paris Climate Agreement.  In this direction, the country has great potential. 
Technically possible and economically feasible to develop hydropower resources of Tajikistan make 317 billion kWh per year, of which about 5% have already been developed.
The development of hydropower industry, as the main direction of sustainable development in Tajikistan, is also linked to the need to increase energy efficiency and energy saving, which proves itself as an effective, less capital-intensive and quickly implementable direction for solving energy problems.  The energy losses in Tajikistan at the stages of its production and transportation are up to 15%, and in the consumption sector - up to 30%.  
Potential for energy saving in the country is about 2.5 billion kWh.
Given the geo-economic and geopolitical trends of modern development, the Government of Tajikistan considers further development of hydropower industry not only as a tool that is key to sustainable development, but also as a factor on which security and stability in the Central Asian region largely depends.  The issues of efficient use of energy and water resources of the region today should be considered not only in the context of adaptation to climate change, but also adequate transboundary water cooperation in the region, which will help to minimize the impact on the environment, as well as increase employment.
The world community and national governments face four major problems related to the energy sector: 1) concern about energy security; 2) combating climate change; 3) reducing pollution and reducing health care threats; 4) elimination of energy poverty. The Government of Tajikistan will make a significant contribution to solving these problems by "greening" the energy sector, including significantly increased investments in renewable energy.
The implementation of these measures in Tajikistan is provided for through the adoption of sectoral programs, as well as targeted programs for energy conservation, which directly corresponds to SDG 7.
19
Ensuring energy security and efficient use of electricity will allow for a comprehensive approach to the issue of SDGs implementation in the country. The NDS-2030 envisages the development of the country's electric power sector based on the 10/10/10/10 concept: an increase in the design capacity of the electric power system up to 10 GW; in annual electricity exports to neighboring countries up to 10 billion kWh; ensuring the diversification of the country's electric power system capacity by at least 10% (increase in capacity of other energy sources, including coal, oil, gas and other renewable energy sources); reduction of energy losses in the country to 10%.
Energy security is especially important for social development in connection with the elimination of poverty (SDG 1), health care (SDG 3), gender (SDG 5), and affordable and clean energy (SDG 7).  However, the connection between energy and social development is not automatic.  Changes in hydrological regimes resulting from climate change (SDG 13) may have an impact on longterm sustainability and the need for use of other renewable energy sources, which can be important for ensuring a power balance (SDG 7).
Priority of food security and safe adequate nutrition is also evident for Tajikistan. Food security is crucial for providing the population with sufficient and healthy nutrition that ensures a long and healthy life, physical activity and a decent life for the population. 
These issues are a priority in the process of nationalizing the SDGs and integrating Agenda 2030 into the country's strategic development documents.  The government of the country considers ensuring food security as a key element in solving economic and social problems of the country, regions, and families.
When assessing the level of food security in Tajikistan, it is necessary to note that national production fully meets domestic needs only in milk and dairy products. The level of selfsufficiency in wheat, meat and meat products and eggs is about 80%. For all other products, the contribution of national production is relatively low.
Given the fact that prices for essential goods are lower in the country than in the world market, and the country as a whole is a low-income country, any even relatively small increase in prices can hinder import and imported products for the population.  From this point of view, one of the most important intervention mechanisms is an increase in domestic supply and a reduction in imports.
Lessons learned from the implementation of the MDGs in the context of food security show that in the near future an active work is needed in the development of mechanisms for intervention and coordination (action plan, including monitoring) in the process of ensuring food security and quality safe nutrition, by developing the necessary measures to improve access of households to food, strengthening of social assistance and child nutrition programs, forming a state food reserve and the state food grain fund.
20
Although the availability of food products for basic necessities in the country has recently improved, but it is rather unstable.  Therefore, one of the necessary measures to ensure food security is to stabilize and further increase the availability of food based on the growth of domestic food production through full use of available agricultural land and increase of their yield, more efficient management of dehqan farms (farms), aimed at enhancing the diversification of their food production structure, reducing losses during the harvest, as well as wider use of high-quality seeds and planting materials.
Price volatility also strongly affects the situation with food security in two main ways: household incomes and purchasing power.  The impact of price volatility is further exacerbated on households at risk.  This is because the speed of integration of the market of basic types of food is still rather slow, and for some types of food products (for example, milk) it has not yet started.  The differences in retail prices observed in the regions reflect differences in the food security situation by region and require a regional approach to policies aimed at supporting vulnerable groups of population.
A positive trend in terms of calories, protein, and fats is observed in both urban and rural areas, which shows some improvement in the nutritional status of the population.  Therefore, measures aimed at improving the structure and safety of food and adequate healthy nutrition will directly contribute to improving the nutritional status of the population.  There are quite ample opportunities in the country for improving the state of food security.  Studies have shown that these opportunities are associated with improved economic and physical accessibility and the nutrition structure of the population, both with average and low incomes.
Therefore, the Government's actions will be aimed at implementing the conceptual foundations of food security and adequate nutrition in the country.
Determining factors of food security and adequate nutri on

Stable economic growth during the implementation of the MDGs and increased productivity in agriculture made it possible to significantly reduce income poverty in Tajikistan.  At the same time, the status of nutrition among the population remains at the low level. Medical-demographic research conducted in the country showed that 26% of children under the age of 5 years are characterized by short stature, 16% by lightweight, and 9% by emaciation.  24.2% of women of fertile age and 28.8% of children aged 6 weeks to 5 years suffer from anemia, and 52.9% from iodine deficiency.
21
Malnutrition is a major factor in child mortality in Tajikistan. This is an indirect cause in 35% of deaths among children under the age of five.  The burden of malnutrition in Tajikistan is significant from the economic point of view, and it is estimated at $41 million annually due to loss of ability to work and working capacity.
Taking into account the current situation, the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan by its Decree approved and launched the National multisectoral strategy and action plan for nutrition and physical activity for 2015-2024.  In addition, in September 2013 the country joined the Global strategy movement for improvement of quality nutrition (SUN).
Difficulties in strengthening food security and ensuring full and safe nutrition in Tajikistan are mainly observed in four major areas: 1) the health sector; 2) poverty reduction and economic development strategies; 3) agricultural sector; and 4) social protection.
SDG 2 emphasizes the complex relationships between food security, nutrition, rural transformation, and sustainable agriculture. This goal links the eradication of hunger and malnutrition with the transformation in agriculture and food systems and the empowerment of rural residents, both women and men, as key drivers of change.  Due to high population growth rate, the share of agricultural land per capita in Tajikistan is steadily falling. If in 1970 per each inhabitant there were 0.17 hectares of agricultural land, in 2017 this figure was only 0.08 hectares.
This situation requires a radical review of the attitude to the effective use of land as a necessary condition for promoting sustainable development of agriculture (SDG 2).
22
Agriculture plays a key and direct role in achieving SDG 2, but it also plays a key role in achieving SDG 1 in eradicating extreme poverty and for some other purposes, especially those related to health, water, biodiversity, sustainable cities, sustainable energy, and climate change. SDG 2 and SDG 1 are linked together.  Achieving the "zero hunger" concept within Agenda 2030 also requires social protection and food systems that are cost-effective, socially open, and environmentally sustainable. In order for everyone to have access to sufficient nutritious food today and tomorrow, it is required: (a) the widespread use of sustainable agriculture and the conservation of biodiversity; b) improving the living conditions of small farmers, including fishermen, foresters, and cattle farmers; c) increasing investment in agriculture, markets, agribusiness, and related infrastructure.
In the context of rapid urbanization, the acceleration of efforts around SDG 1 and SDG 2 requires efforts to improve the links between urban and rural areas through investments in food systems that can supply urban markets with nutritious, safe, and affordable food and expand economic opportunities for the rural and suburban population through the creation of value added chains.
Achieving universal coverage in Tajikistan in the field of water supply and sanitation (SDG 6) remains one of the key development challenges.  Access to centralized water supply systems at the national level is 59.2%. It ranges from 94.1% for the urban population and 45.2% for the rural population. The rest of the population consumes water from other sources (springs, wells, irrigation ditches, canals, precipitation, etc.) that do not meet sanitary requirements. This, in turn, leads to the spread of waterborne infectious diseases. Out of 764 water supply systems in the country, 463 pipelines do not meet sanitary requirements.
As for the regional development, there remain considerable differences in the quality of water, used by the urban and rural population for economic and drinking purposes, there is also a gap among the regions regarding the level of social infrastructure development. Along with this, a relatively higher demographic load in rural areas signals about the acuteness of the problem of employment and incomes in peripheria. The creation of productive employmen opportunities remains the key problem in further poverty reduction. 
Despite the institutional reforms in the sphere of funding, management and organization of healthcare, the results regarding the state of health are still difficult to assess, for example, tuberculosis morbidity remains high. On top of that, the quality of healthcare and education services leave much to be desired. 
In education sector the number of preschool institutions needs to be increased; a large number of pre-school institutions in the country require capital repair. Many students do not attend secondary schools regularly, especially in winter period, when lots of problems arise due to the lack of transportation means, central heating and electricity cuts in schools. Majority of rural schools and medical institutions do not have access to improved sanitation or water sources. Currently, the skills of not less than 35-40% of specialists in average are below the labor market requirements. Based on this, the Government plans in coming 5 years to engage into the retraining programs not less than 115 thousand people a year.
23
Ecological problems and vulnerabilities remain extremely considerable, especially in the context of climate change. These problems are becoming still more acute within the framework of new SDGs, which include rational use of water resources (SDG 6), provision of viability of settlements (SDG 11), adoption of urgent measures against the climate change (SDG 13), protection of land ecosystems (SDG 15).
It is still premature to speak about fully ensured ecological sustainability in the country. Thus, technologies for the use of renewable sources of energy are still on the development stage and cannot compete with traditional energy sources. The system of monitoring for the record of qualitative and quantative indicators of the state of biodiversity is still missing. The water supply and sewage system infrastructure is almost worn-out  (70%) and needs to be restored.
More than 97% of agricultural lands in 
Tajikistan are affected by erosion. Under ADB, degradation of land in the country as a result of erosion, caused by the exhaustion of pastures, affected around 3 million hectares, or 85% of pastures. Based on the findings of the survey, conducted in 2011 under the UNDPUNEP Intitiative \0xB4Poverty and Environment (PE)\0xAA, in Tajikistan the economic loss from the degradation of land, related to lost benefit as a result of degradation and unfitness for agricultural works, makes 442 million USD, or 7,8% of GDP of Tajikistan (2010). However, the actual loss is much higher as it does not include the damage to infrastructure, caused by the degradation of land, and this can become one of the reasons, blocking \0xB4landscaping\0xAA of agriculture.
Rural population of Tajikistan is mostly affected by the degradation of environment. As for the regional development, there remain considerable differences regarding the quality of water, used by the urban and rural population for economic and drinking purposes, there also remains a gap among the regions regarding the level of social infrastructure development. Along with this, a relatively higher demographic load in rural areas signals about the acuteness of the problem of employment and incomes in peripheria.
NDS-2030 states that the problems of unequal access of females and males to material (land, finances, etc.) and nonmaterial (education, healthcare and others) kinds of resources are factors, obstructing not only the development of females, but also the development of the community and economy as a whole. Harmonization of goals and objectives, adopted in socio-economic and gender-based strategies and programs, reflected in SDG 5 and SDG 10, are a condition, required for the promotion of gender equality. 
The Government of Tajikistan attaches much importance to the systematic record of gender aspects and use of a complex approach while selecting measures for overcoming gender-based unequality, based on the lessons learned during the elaboration and implementation of the sustainable development Agenda till 2030 as well as their integration into strategic documents of the country. 
24
Women make half of the population of the country. That is why it is impossible to achieve sustainable development in Tajikistan without overcoming a gender inequality, without empowering women to enjoy guaranteed rights and elimination of kea reasons for the gender-based discrimination. Empowering women economically, 
politically and socially as well as treating women as not only as a vulnerable group, but active members of transformations in the community should become basis for the progress on the road to sustainable development and achievement of actual equality of females and males.
Elimination of poverty can be reached only through the elimination of genderbased discrimination. Gender-based inequality is the main cause of poverty among women, depriving them of their fundamental rights and opportunities for ensuring their own well-being. It is expedient to use Gender Gap Index for the assessment of the gender gap as it defines the rating of the country, taking into consideration availiabilty of equal opportunities for economic and  political participation, as well as access to healthcare and education services. 
Unequal access for women to all kinds of resources in the country is still the case, despite the progress reached in overcoming the gender-based inequality and women empowering. Of a concern are also considerable genderbased differences regarding access to resources, including access to land and financial assets for women. Women make a minority with respect to the owners of property rights or decisionmakers. 
One of the risks for women is a considerable dependence on labor migrants `remittances. As for this indicator, the share of females makes around 65% and males - 35%. 
The issues of unequal access for women to land, given a considerable share of rural population and the role of women in agricultural production, are among the most acute ones. 
NDS-2030 envisages for women not only having equal access to land and other resources, but also a real control over them, notably, the possibility to really impact  decision-making regarding actual issues. 
25
Lately, a considerable increase of gender-based inequality is the case regarding access to primary vocational education. The share of girls among the students from primary vocational schools is going down from 34,4% in 2000 to 19,2% in 2015.
Share of girls among students of higher and secondary educa onal ins tu ons of the RT by specialty groups (%)
Given positive trends in the sphere of secondary and higher vocational institutions, the gender disbalance, regarding specialization in these institutions, is significant.  With regard to pedagogical specialties, the girls in higher educational institutions make up to 75,3%, in secondary special educational institutions n 64,8%, then in the group by specialty \0xB4law\0xAA - 19% in higher educational institutions, and around 6% in secondary special educational institutions, in economics the share of girls does not reach 28%. The lowest are indicators for training girls by specialty \0xECagriculture: around 3% in secondary special educational institutions and a bit more than  5% in higher educational institutions 

Low level of education is also becoming one of the barriers for the development of entrepreneurship among women. Despite the implementation of various training and stimulating programs for women, involvement of women into entrepreneurship activity versus men is going on at low rates. 
At large, only every fifth entrepreneur in the country is a women (2016). 
The share of women among enterpreneurs, working with certificates, makes 23,5%. Gender-based norms and values impact real access for women to medical services and information, which is directly linked to reproductive health, a mother and a child health. At the same time, achieving SDGs will require ensuring a universal access to healthcare services, including sexual and reproductive services, as well as family planning. Thus, males and females wiil have the opportunity to make informed decisions about their health, have access to safe, effective, accessible and acceptable medical services, including services and methods for family planning at their choice. 
26
For achieving planned outcomes of SDGs by 2030 it is important to shift away from traditional sectoral approach while solving the problem of genderbased inequality. Holistic and integrated policy measures should be in place at the local and national levels. 
Harmonization of goals and objectives of adopted socio-economic and genderbased strategies and programs are a prerequisite for the promotion of gender equality. 
For the support of holistic and balanced approaches for achieving SDGs 1,2,3,5,9 and 17, there is a need in reliable, accountable platforms with participation of many parties concerned and partnership relations.  That is why the actions of the Government will be aimed at strengthening the mechanisms of management and coordination with participation of many stakeholders, which should include intersectoral dialogue and institutional development support to stimulate parties concerned to jointly work over the development of common decisions for reaching common goals.
These mechanisms with engagement of many stakeholders can also be used for identification and mobilization of the capacity, information, techonologies, financial needs, and access to industrial recources, required for the implementation and support of agreed strategies. UN institutions can play a unique role of a trustworthy and neutral mediator, ensuring and supporting agreed among the states norms and standards, controlling obligations and tracking outcomes, as well as promoting institutional adaptation and strengthening. 
6. VISION OF THE FUTURE BASED ON 
LESSONS LEARNED 
Incomplete nature of MDGs in Tajikistan means that stimulus for impetus and \0xB4back count\0xAA can be effective, including focusing on selected set of priority goals on the local and national levels. Transition to sustainable development is the end state of the entire Agenda 2030. 
Broad introduction/integration of the 2030 Agenda into national, subnational and local development plans, and later into budget allocations include all management levels. While for the national Government it is important to set goals and objectives on the country level and develop mandates for their support, regional bodies of state management bear the responsibility for their implement -tation on sites. Thus, regional authorities also perform a crucial role in sustainable development promotion, which is a valuable tool for SDGs localization. As the main vision of the Government of the development and future of the country, NDS-2030 and conformity of its priorities with SDGs, lay foundation for overcoming existing challenges that the country encounters.
27
This will require effective intersectoral coordination mechanism to ensure that the policy is elaborated and carried out in a concerted and complex way. It is critical to ensure the approach with participation of many stakeholders, so that not only state institutions, but also the Parliament, civil society and private sector could exercise their influence.   Close coordination and partner -ship with international development partners, including United Nations Organization agencies, is an essential element. 
In the sphere of monitoring and accountability within the framework of SDGs nationalization there is a need to improve a mechanism of coordination among all partners through setting up technical working groups for the implementation of SDGs and NDS, based on the sectoral approach. Secretariat of the NDS under the President of the RT is an effective platform for coordina -tion among state agencies, and the Government plans to implement such mechanism. 
For \0xB4leaving no one behind\0xAA, it is suggested in Tajikistan to pay a special attention to the system of monitoring and evaluation of disaggregated data and issues of SDGs `localization, so as to meet the needs of such groups of population, like women, children and elderly people, rural communities and people with disabilities.  
Establishment of the national system of evaluation and monitoring of demographic and social processes as well as the system of interagency coordination for their assessment and prognosis, aimed at decreasing mortality and  increasing life span, provision by 2030 of a universal access to the services for the protection of a reproductive health, improving the culture of reproductive behavior, reduction of risks and threats of casualties, mortality from manageable causes is important condition. 
28
\0xB4Action campaign\0xAA comes forward as important direction of nationalization of SDGs in Tajikistan, it could trigger public interest in accomplishing national development goals through creative and innovative communication methods in the sphere of policy and sponsoring of processes with the goal of strengthening of mechanisms of accountability and monitoring of the progress. Many arrangements, backing up SDGs implementation, if need be, will be closely linked to the program and project support on behalf of the development partners. They also will rely on agreed concerted efforts of the UN agencies, so as to ensure that their programs and projects are oriented at SDGs implementation. Nevertheless, despite some starting points in this report, it does not mean that it is an exclusive list of all possible support points, which can cover SDGs implementation. The Government of  Tajikistan notes that partnership relations remain the basis for the SDGs implementation and that the work of international development partners can be strengthened to support SDGs implementation in coming years. 
Development of nationalized target exponents and indicators, specially selected for the context of  Tajikistan, based on the use of global goals and indicators as a starting point is important direction in the future work of the Government. It is critical to develop a single list of suggested for implementation SDGs and relevant indicators, which are going to be  a priority in the course of the next five year period, as well as bring them in compliance with the corresponding national programs for monitoring along with the monitoring of goals and objectives of NDS-2030 and MTDP-2020.
The experience of MDGs implementation showed that the Secreteriat of the Council for national development under the President of the RT, comprised of many parties concerned, regarding SDGs should become the impetus for the agreement of relevant goals, objectives and indicators, adapted to national needs and circumstances. It can ensure effective agreement regarding policy goals and indicators, so that an effective system of monitoring and evaluation could be developed, starting from several key sectors and SDGs in support of implementation of national development goals. 
Important aspect is the issue of development of measures for the acceleration of nationalization and implementation of SDGs. MDG related arrangements, that were not finalized, should be corrected soon with consideration of the principles of the 2030 Agenda, especially regarding indivisibility of the Agenda. 
During the last 15 years Tajikistan is on the stage of \0xB4a demographic dividend\0xAA, having a demographic opportunity for further development: the number of able-bodied population exceeds the share of dependents. This is the opportunity for stimulating inclusive economic development of the country, increasing people`s savings and investments into human capital, effective use of human capital for the purposes of sustainable development.
Tajikistan intends to invest into its human capital in order to make use of the benefit of the relatively short period of the demographic dividend for overcoming poverty, achieving directions and priorities of the NDS-2030 and making a considerable contribution into SDGs accomplishment on the global level. 
Much attention should be paid to the elimination of regional discrepancies and multidimensional poverty under the concept of overcoming of inequality.  There is a need to increase capacity for speeding up further achievements in the sphere of social development, notably, through paying a special attention to critical objectives of social development, envisaged by the NDS-2030 and MTDP2020 in such spheres, like healthcare, education and food security,  there is a need in capacity building for speeding up further accomplishments in the social development sphere through SDGs. 
29
Additional spheres for acceleration include energy sector, gender equality and the youth as factors, which can have a multiplicative effect and maximally impact accomplishment of various goals and objectives. Considering a modern situation of \0xB4a demographic dividend in Tajikistan, in future the Governmen will view investments into the youth as a factor for speeding up accomplishment of many SDGs.
Efficiency of arrangements in the sphere of sustainable development and nationalization of SDGs in Tajikistan will  mainly depend on the effectiveness of the systems, oriented at outcomes, monitoring and evaluation of national and sectoral development plans, especially NDS-2030 and MTDP-2020.
Arrangements related to SDGs to be implemented through the priorities of NDS -2030 and MTDP-2020 to a certain extent will be funded from the public budget of the country. Besides, several SDG objectives will be also supported from local budgets of the regions, especially regarding the arrangements for the nationalization of SDGs in the regions of the country. However, funding of the full coverage of SDG Agenda is impossible due to the limited budget. 
Unlike previous strategic vision documents, private investments, both foreign and internal, will play a more important role in financing of the obligations, regarding SDGs under the priorities of the NDS -2030 and MTDP2020. To this end, strategic documents envisage a radical improvement of the investment climate for both foreign and local investors, which will have effect on additional capacity of the public budget in social sphere.  
A very important source for the program development of the country is investment support from development partners, financial resources of multisided organizations as well as their technical assistance for the elaboration and implementation of the reforms and arrangements under NDS-2030 and MTDP-2020. It is expected that development partners will increase funding through grants, which complies with the spirit of new sustainable development goals. The role of coordination of donors and UN agencies in support of the outcomes of the UN Framework Program for aiding development goals (UNDAF) and establishment of clear cut links with the progress, regarding SDGs, can ensure a reliable justification of the progress in socio-economic issues and potential promotion towards SDGs implementation. 
Specific tools for the assessment of funding, such as reviews of expenditures with the goal of finding ways to reinforce trust in commitment to institutional management, public finance management in support of the reform processes, which can help speed up the progress in SDGs implementation, will play important role in financing. 
30
The Government of Tajikistan through innovative political reforms will be seeking for the mechanisms for a better utilization of money transfers for development purposes, so as to increase investments of households into such spheres, like energy sector, education, entrepreneurship and healthcare, and, by doing this, to decrease the scope of poverty through indirect multiplicative effects, including fiscal and monetary stimuli. 
System of monitoring and evaluation is a critical element for national development goals. Continuous and complex monitoring of the goals is becoming a still more important task for SDGs as the number of indicators went up considerably. While the number of target indicators for eight MDGs in NDS made 24, then more than 200 indicators  are reflected in SDGs. The transfer from the national level to the regional level requires adaptation of target indicators and monitoring indicators. Many indicators cannot be calculated on the district level, and there is a need to replace them with matching in fact, but adapted to district conditions indicators. At the same time, there should remain a hierarchic linkage between branch and regional documents with the National Development Strategy.
In view of the Government of Tajikistan, there is a serious challenge, interfering with effective planning, implementation and monitoring of development in the country, notably, sectoral strategic, program and budget priorities so far match neither new national strategic documents, nor international obligations of Tajikistan on SDGs.  This mainly hampers practical implementation of the national development priorities, makes it rather difficult to monitor and evaluate the outcomes of the implementation of strategic documents and SDGs and hampers the effective coordination of the donor assistance.
On top of that, the activity of the Government will be channeled into linking existing sectoral programs with each other, bringing them in compliance with standards of program and target planning method and capacity of the public budget, so as to reduce the risk of insufficient provision of programs with resources as well as irrational use of public budget and extra budget financial resources.
A special attention in NDS-2030 is paid to strengthening of the national system of monitoring and evaluation through independent and transparent monitoring of the results and processes, linked to the implementation of the priorities, in compliance with approved indicators, which are measurable, adequate, economically effective and directly reflect midterm outcomes.
31
Monitoring and evaluation system will be managed and coordinated by the Ministry for economic development and trade (MEDT), acting as a Secretariat of the National development Council under the President of the RT (NDC), and will be carried out \0xB4jointly with relevant branch and territorial bodies of the state governance, civil public organizations and commercial structures, as well as development partners\0xAA, together with the State Statistics Agency under the President of the Republic of Tajikistan, which is the main source of quantitative data, with other ministries and agencies, which collect relevant data up to their authority. MTDP-2020 also states that monitoring and evaluation will become a single system, which will reduce parallel structures for monitoring and overlapping of the efforts for data collection. 
Similarly, MTDP-2020 lays initial foundations for NDS-2030 through identification of priority spheres for support for coming five years with expected funding in the amount of 25 billion USD, which, as expected, will be mobilized from the national budget (54%), private sector (36%) and development partners (10%). While NDS-2030 and MTDP-2020 envisage comprehensive directions for the policy of the country, there are other strategic documents, such as district strategies and sectoral strategies, which in essence are framework programs for the implementation of the priorities of these documents. Agreed strategies and programs at all levels will be crucial for providing effective and efficient  ways for the implementation of future development priorities. At the same time, the efficiency of the arrangements in the development sphere in Tajikistan will, to a considerable extent, depend not only on the system of planning and financing, but also on the efficiency of the systems oriented at the outcomes of monitoring and evaluation of the national and branch development plans. 
The Government hopes that development partners can support elaboration of the guiding principles of M & E policy, which will serve as basis for planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programs, funded by the state as well as initiatives, funded by development partners in the country.
This will include responsibility and accountability at various governmental levels for the outcomes, especially for the national programs contributing into the national priorities and objectives during a certain period. Elaboration of monitoring and evaluation policy will include a series of dialogues/discussions in the form of round table meetings with participation of all parties concerned and will be prepared in the context of the national reports of Tajikistan about the implementation of SDGs, NDS -2030 and MTDP-2020.
For the purposes of modern, thorough and rapid SDGs assessment, Tajikistan will learn innovative ways of information collection about interventions/projects regarding development in the country and will try to define innovative options for the introduction of data/indicators for the elimination of gaps among the data in case they are difficult to collect or costly.
More active participation of the civil society and broader audience towards SDGs as well as their engagement into the implementation and tracking outcomes will also be critical. To this end, a target approach for raising awareness of the community through specific messages to the audience is reqired. For example, attraction of the young people is important because todays` youth will accomplish the 2030 Agenda.
32
7. CONCLUSION 
The outcomes of the Review have shown that Tajikistan has reached certain successes within the framework of developing a mechanism for SDGs nationalization. No doubt, the key achievement is elaboration and adoption of key strategic development documents for the long-term and midterm periods. On top of that, the current Review has become the first analytical document about SDG related achievements, which made it possible to identify where the country is regarding SDGs nationalization and implementation, what are the existing gaps and challenges on the road for their implementation.
The first outcomes of the current Review were presented at the international conference \0xB4Strengthening of partnership for achieving sustainable development given modern challenges and threats\0xAA, which was held in June 12, 2017, in Dushanbe with participation of the UN Secretary General Mr. Antonio Guterres. Conducting of VNR showed what steps should be undertaken for further introduction of SDGs in the country. No doubt, this experience was useful for the country in selecting directions for further introduction of SDGs. 
33
Among the existing challenges and gaps there are several that are worth being highlighted, namely, issues of coordination of actions and responsibility for SDGs implementation in the context of implementation of NDS - 2030, issues of elaboration of sectoral policies with SDGs consideration, development of M & E system with consideration of SDGs, introduction and implementation of SDGs on the local level, as well as issues of funding of SDGs.
Within the framework of coordination of activity, it was defined, that the country needs, based on the existing mechanism of the Secretariat of the Council for national development under the President of the RT, to form technical working groups, and assign responsible ministries and agencies for their implementation. Within the framework of coordination, a platform for interaction among development partners should be set up, which will allow involving larger number of stakeholders as well as making timely decisions. 
Another critical issue is elaboration of sectoral policies, considering SDGs and objectives of NDS-2030. In this connection, MEDT plans to develop methodological basis for the introduction of SDGs and NDS-2030 into sectoral development programs. 
Elaboration of M & E system for SDGs and NDS-2030 remains a key issue. To this end, main steps will be undertaken regarding the linkage of global indicators with indicators that are important for the country.
Currently, the work for the elaboration of the M & E system continues. A separate attention will be also paid to alternative data, reviews and reports, especially in the fields, where Tajikistan does not have methodology and resources for conducting research. As mentioned before, involvement of the civil society and the Parliament into M & E through creation of platforms for discussions and participation in discussions, public and parliamentary hearings on the issues of SDGs and NDS-2030 are essential. 
It should be noted that here Tajikistan is looking forward to a resource support from development partners and the UN technical assistance. 
It is impossible to imagine achieving SDGs outcomes without resource provision. Tajikistan has identified main sources for the implementation of NDS-2030 and SDGs. However, it will be difficult to achieve results and create conducive atmosphere for sustainable development without development partners. SDGs funding is the most important part; along with this, Tajikistan, considering implementation of previous strategies, will focus on the effective use of funds for the most problematic fields. 
34
Integration of SDGs into the national development policy allows Tajikistan to implement in a more target way such priorities of its socio-economic policy, like effective use of natural resources; ensuring diversification and competitiveness of the national economy; industrial development of the country (SDG 9); poverty reduction and increase of the number of middle class in the community; environmental protection and balanced development of the regions (SDG 11). 
Tajikistans` water initiatives, supported by the world community, especially, the adoption at the end of  2016 of a resolution, declaring International action decade \0xB4Water for sustainable development for the period of 20182028\0xAA, are aimed not only at the improvement and development of energy sector infrastructure, water supply and irrigation systems, but can also become a serious step on the road for the creation of conditions at the national, regional and global levels for the implementation of sustainable development goals, linked to water and sanitation, elimination of all forms of poverty. 
Tajikistan, a world leader in using the resources for producing \0xB4green electric energy\0xAA, with its hydro energy, making the basis for energy potential, is strongly determined to ensure access to modern energy sources and development of \0xB4green energy\0xAA, as key factors for achieving sustainable development.  
Such complex approach, in its turn, will result in strengthening stamina of needy and vulnerable people, lessen their lack of protection and vulnerability before extreme phenomena, caused by climate change, other economic, social and ecological shocks and disasters.
In this connection, broadening of cooperation and partnership at the regional and global levels under SDG 17 makes it possible to mobilize considerable resources from various sources, including activization of cooperation for development purposes as basis, to provide for the developing countries, especially for land locked countries, sufficient and predictable financial resources for carrying out programs and strategies for SDGs implementation. 
