A transformative Agenda for sustainable development 
The Summit of Heads of State and Government on the Post-2015 Development Agenda culminated in the adoption, by the United Nations General Assembly of the Resolution A/RES/70/1 entitled \0xECTransforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, on September 25th 2015. As a universal agenda, based on 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and 169 targets to be implemented by all countries, the 2030 Agenda calls for the integration of the SDGs into the policies, procedures and actions developed at the 5 national, regional and global levels. 	
According to former United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, \0xECthe 17 SDGs are our shared vision of humanity and a social contract between the worldis leaders and the people. Ant\0xDBnio Guterres, in turn, has identified the support to sustainable development, along with working for peace and internally reforming the Organization, as one of 3 priorities for his mandate as the current United Nations Secretary-General. 
In fact, it should be noted that this is an Agenda with a universal dimension, to be implemented by all Parties, and not just the developing countries, in contrast with the 2000-2015 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). 
The 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) have therefore changed the way we approach development by: 
i) integrating the 3 dimensions of sustainable development (economic, social and environmental); ii) being based on universal goals and targets to be implemented by all countries (and not only by developing countries); iii) having a greater potential for tackling inequality and promoting human rights as a cross-cutting concern across all SDGs; and iv) involving new dynamic concerted efforts from a wide range of actors, including nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), the private corporate sector, academia, social partners and other members of civil society, including the co-operation between parliament, government, regional and local authorities. This is a challenge which concerns us all. 
 
 
 
Portugalis negotiating position in the process of adopting the 2030 Agenda 
Portugal played an active role in drafting the document adopted at the Summit, including in the establishment of the common position to be taken by the European Union (EU), particularly in: i) recognizing the need to give more attention to issues pertaining to peace, security and good governance, with an emphasis on the situation of fragile States; ii) promoting and advocating the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, an issue of critical importance to Portugal; and iii) integrating a strong human rights dimension that tackles inequalities, while paying particular attention to the gender equality issues. 
Portugal also argues that this Agenda needs to be based on genuine shared responsibilities between public and private actors, as well as between developed and developing countries, in addition to the traditional NorthSouth approach. 
Concerning the debate on the adaptation of the United Nations system to the challenges of the 2030 Agenda, Portugal has been arguing for an adjustment that would enable it to follow up on the degree of political commitment made, while highlighting the need to ensure the efficiency and effectiveness of a United Nations system based on structured co-operation and complementarity between the different actors at the global, regional and national levels, that exploits synergies and interdependencies between their competences and strategies, avoids duplication and seeks to maximize capabilities and impact. 
 
Implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the global level 
Turning this vision into reality is primarily the responsibility of national governments, but the challenges also 6 require new partnerships and a greater expression of international solidarity. All have a role to play so that no one is left behind. 
Each country, including governments, civil society, companies and representatives of different stakeholders, will have to regularly assess the progress made. A set of about 230 global indicators will be used. Its results are set to be compiled in a comprehensive annual report, \0xECThe Sustainable Development Goals Report. The report highlights where the world stands regarding the implementation of these global goals, using statistical data and underlining the main gaps and the most pressing challenges facing our world. 
The first report, published last year, shows that about 1 in every 8 persons in the world still lives in extreme poverty, some 800 million people are suffering from hunger, the birth of nearly one in four children under the age of 5 years is still unregistered, women spend about 2.4 times more hours per day on caregiving and household tasks than men, 1.1 billion people live without electricity, and water scarcity now affects more than 2 billion people in the world. 
These statistical data highlight the importance of a global coordination of the international cooperation efforts, but the goals, in fact, apply to all societies. As the former United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-Moon, said, \0xECdeveloped societies still need to promote gender equality and eliminate all forms of discrimination. 
 
 
 
The approach at the EU level 
At our regional level, the European Union seeks to set out a new approach to ensure growth and sustainability in its three dimensions (economic, social and environmental) beyond 2020. This process, which is associated to the review of the Europe 2020 Strategy for the future, must reflect the internal and external achievement of the two major international milestones of 2015 in Sustainable Development: the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. 
In this respect it should be noted that sustainability in Europe extends far beyond its internal dimension. Multiple global challenges such as extreme poverty and inequality, conflicts, migration, terrorism, climate change, pandemics have, in the end, a direct impact on Europe, which is why sustainability in the region cannot be examined separately from its external dimension. 
The commitment to sustainable development across borders shall be matched with efforts to ensure the internal sustainability of the European Union. It is therefore crucial that the different actors incorporate and align their strategies, programmes and initiatives to the SDGs. 
In that sense, the European Commission has published, on November 22nd 2016, a Communication on the \0xECNext steps for a sustainable European future that sets out how the 2030 Agenda is to be implemented within the EU. That document confirms that sustainable development has for long been at the heart of the European project. The EU Treaties recognize the economic, social and environmental dimensions, which should be addressed together, reflecting a commitment to development that answers to todayis needs without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own. 
	The EU response to the internal implementation of the 2030 Agenda includes two work streams: 	7 
\0xEF The first one, presented in the referred Communication, is to fully integrate the SDGs in the European policy framework and the Juncker Commission's ten priorities for its current term, identifying the most relevant sustainability concerns, but also assessing European policies and the efforts to achieve the 17 Goals; 
\0xEF A second one will launch reflection work on further developing a long-term European vision and focus on sector-based policies after 2020 which enable the long-term implementation of the SDGs. The new Multiannual Financial Framework beyond 2020 shall also reorient the EU budget's contributions towards that same end. 
In addition, several EU financing instruments complement European policies and initiatives and contribute horizontally to the SDGs. Particular emphasis is to be given to the cohesion policy n through the European Structural and Investment Funds n as it is the main investment policy of the EU, with a view to achieving economic, social and territorial development by reducing disparities between European regions. 
Simultaneously, regarding the external implementation of the 2030 Agenda, the Commission also presented on November 22nd 2016 a Communication on the review of the European Consensus on Development (2005), seeking to adapt the development policy of the EU to the new international development architecture. The revised European Consensus will be adopted in 2017 and is organized around the 5Ps of the 2030 Agenda. It will have a decisive impact on the elaboration of development instruments and programmes of the EU and its Member States, fostering their alignment with the SDGs and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. 
On the other hand, the EU's impact outside its borders is not limited to its external action agenda. Many EU policies contribute to the implementation of the SDGs worldwide. Therefore, achieving coherence across all EU policies is crucial to achieving the SDGs. 
 
Other ongoing multilateral processes 
Moreover, Portugal has been strongly involved in the efforts undertaken by other international bodies to align their respective policies and instruments to the SDGs, in particular: i) the newly created contact network of the Comunidade dos Pa\0xCCses de L\0xCCngua Portuguesa (CPLP) [Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries] aimed at achieving the SDGs and, in so doing, promotes experience-sharing and partnerships for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda; ii) the adoption of an Action Plan of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on the SDGs with a view to mainstream the SDGs across the organisationis work; and iii) the process of modernizing the OECD Development Assistance Committee, financing tools and the statistical reporting system, in the light of the SDGs. 
 
Institutional model applied in Portugal: coordination and participation 
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs was responsible for coordinating the national position for the drafting of the 2030 Agenda. However, its implementation at the national level brings new challenges, which require some reshaping of institutional models to reflect and meet the inherent cross-sector coordination requirements. 
                                                                                              8 In this process, it is also relevant to create mechanisms that provide the necessary coordination between the various institutional stakeholders, with a view to present progress reports in a number of different fora in which the implementation of the 2030 Agenda is discussed. 
Accordingly, the Council of Ministers has adopted the first intra-governmental guidelines for the 2030 Agenda on February 25th 2016. Taking into account the need for a close alignment between the two lines of action of this Agenda n the internal and the external ones n, as well as the necessary structured dialogue with the United Nations bodies, within which the political management of the implementation will be carried out, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs assumed the overall coordination, together with the Ministry of Planning and Infrastructures. 
Pursuant to these guidelines, this role is played at an institutional level through the commissions responsible for the inter-ministerial coordination on foreign policy (acting as a coordination forum in charge of overseeing the domestic implementation by several ministries and preparing the reports that will inform the monitoring processes at different levels) and the inter-ministerial coordination on development cooperation (responsible for coordinating the incorporation of the SDGs into the national Development Cooperation, with regards to the external dimension of the Agenda). 
In operational terms, a network of focal points from different government departments has been established. This mechanism enables, in a consistent and integrated manner, public authorities to better coordinate and exchange information between each other, thus contributing to regular updates and monitoring of the progress the country is achieving during this 15-year time horizon. 
 
Thereafter, each of the SDGs was allocated to a coordinating ministry responsible for its implementation, monitoring and review. However, within a complementarity framework, it is important to promote the constant dialogue with other ministries and stakeholders, in a spirit of cooperation, with a view to implement this Agenda with an integrated and inclusive approach. 
In this context, the countryis baseline analysis on the implementation of the Agenda began with the collection of data and information in relation to all 17 SDGs, and, as a result, leading to a mapping of national policies contributing to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. In this exercise, one should underline the crucial role of Statistical Portugal and the Agency for Development and Cohesion. Indeed, in view of the challenges facing the country, the availability of data (in both quantitative and qualitative terms n available online at www.ine.pt1) is essential for planning, monitoring and reviewing economic and social programmes and policies with an impact on development. 
It should also be noted that the local authorities play a significant role in implementing the 2030 Agenda within their territory, through a set of initiatives that, in respect of their local autonomy, undoubtedly contributes to the implementation process at the national level, as a result of proximity and concrete action. 
Simultaneously, a public consultation on the implementation of the 2030 Agenda at the national and local levels took place in 2016. This process was led by a group of non-governmental organizations of the Portuguese civil society2, with the support of Cam\0x0131es n Instituto da Coopera\0xC1\0x201Eo e da L\0xCCngua, I.P. [Cam\0x0131es n Institute for Cooperation and Language] and the United Nations Regional Information Centre for Western Europe, with a view to collecting input on the operationalization, evaluation and monitoring of the Agenda, namely for the purpose of preparing periodic sectorial \0xECshadow reports. 
                                                                                              9 Between April and July 2016, eight workshops took place, in different parts of the country, with a significant geographical scope, engaging participants representing more than 130 organizations. Moreover, this process included an online enquiry in an attempt to reach a wider audience and provide an opportunity for every citizen to share views, individually or on behalf of an organization. The main recommendations drawn from the civil society consultation process were presented during a seminar taking place at the Portuguese Parliament on April 19th 2017, contributing to the planning and implementation debates of the 2030 Agenda in Portugal. 
In addition, being aware of the holistic and inclusive nature of this exercise, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs organized, on March 29th 2017, a multi-stakeholder seminar bringing together representatives of civil society. The purpose of this event was to present the inter-ministerial work, inform about the methodology used for drafting the present report as well as the next steps be taken in preparation for the United Nations High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, and hear the participating organizationsi views on how the 2030 Agenda has been integrated into their own activities. 
Furthermore, the United Nations Global Compact Network Portugal coordinates the multi-stakeholder platform SDG Alliance Portugal, whose purpose is to raise awareness, inform, implement, monitor and evaluate the contribution of the private sector and other civil society partners to the SDGs at national level. Determined to build bridges for dialogue and cooperation, as advocated by SDG17, it creates a sustainable basis for the development of partnerships, projects, programmes and actions within the framework of the 2030 Agenda. 
The encouragement of partnerships is thus both a necessity and a priority, to be continuously updated within the scope of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
 
National priorities 
The main level of the implementation process of the 2030 Agenda being undoubtedly the national one, each country has to establish how the SDGs should be implemented. Given that there are 17 SDGs and 169 targets, there is a natural tendency for each State to establish its own strategic priorities. According to this perspective, a reflection on the countryis priorities is part of the national ambition, as a strategy closely associated with the cross-cutting evaluation of the state of play of the SDGs implementation. 
While respectful of the national priorities and strategic guidelines, the 2030 Agenda implementation is carried out in: i) a full and comprehensive manner, taking into account the national effort to achieve all SDGs; ii) an integrated approach ensuring a global perspective on sustainable development promotion and avoiding considering policies in separate silos; and iii) a focused attitude, by clearly identifying priority areas in the light of the countryis development strategy, particularly embodied in the National Reform Programme. Streamlining the 2030 Agenda into national strategies, plans and policies revolves around five thematic areas: 10 
\0xEF People n reflecting the determination to end poverty and hunger, in all forms and dimensions, and ensuring that all human beings can fulfil their potential in dignity and equality and in a healthy environment; 
\0xEF Prosperity n ensuring that all human beings can enjoy prosperous and fulfilling lives and that economic, social and technological progress occurs in harmony with nature; 
\0xEF Planet n strengthening the conviction that the planet needs to be protected from degradation, including through sustainable consumption and production, sustainably managing its natural resources and taking urgent action on climate change, so that it can support the needs of the present and future generations; 
\0xEF Peace n emphasizing the determination to foster peaceful, just and inclusive societies which are free from fear and violence, while recalling that there can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace without sustainable development; 
\0xEF Partnership n mobilizing the means required to implement the 2030 Agenda through a revitalized Global Partnership for Sustainable Development, based on a spirit of strengthened global solidarity, focused in particular on the needs of the poorest and most vulnerable and with the participation of all countries, all stakeholders and all people, leaving no one behind. 
 
In light of the foregoing, Portugal embodies its strategic priorities for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in SDG 4, 5, 9, 10, 13 and 14. 
11 

In relation to this aspect, as set out in the National Reform Programme, Portugal attaches great importance to education, training and skills throughout life. In so doing, Portugal seeks to reverse historical lags and exclusions having a direct impact on well-being, economic performance, fighting poverty, promoting equality and social cohesion, citizenship and on environment. Therefore, SDG4 n Quality Education is regarded as a priority area and cross-cutting issue for other Sustainable Development Goals. 
One fundamental task of the State is to promote equality between women and men. Non-discrimination on grounds of gender identity or sexual orientation is a fundamental principle of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and a structural element of the democratic rule of law. There is a clear obligation on any government to pursue active gender equality policies n a duty built on an obligation that applies to society in general. The gender equality dimension should therefore be taken into account whenever any public policy is devised and carried out. Equality between women and men is in itself an imperative and a social purpose; it is essential to fully experience citizenship and as such it is a prerequisite for building a modern, fair and equitable society, as well as for achieving truly sustainable development that fully respects human dignity. Thus, when prioritizing the SDGs at the national level, the high relevance of SDG5 n Gender Equality was identified. 
On the other hand, economic growth, social development and climate change mitigation and adaptation are intertwined with investment in adequate infrastructure, in a modern, entrepreneurial and sustainable industry, with technological progress and the digitalization of the economy. Portugal is committed to addressing these challenges by presenting, to this end, strategies and programmes aimed at supporting and developing the infrastructure, industry and innovation sectors, while mobilizing public and private resources for that purpose. In its programme, the current Government has announced its intention to create the dynamics for balanced economic growth and social cohesion, which mutually reinforce one another, ensuring consolidation of public finances; and adopted its medium-term strategy for development of the Portuguese economy in the National Reform Programme. It is therefore a priority to achieve SDG9 n Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure. 
Within a prosperity framework, the principle of economic, social and territorial cohesion, widely recognized as the new paradigm of territorial development, attempts to tackle social and economic inequalities, as well as regional disparities, while being firmly based on the development of strategies to promote social justice as a normative principle associated with equity and equal opportunities. In the short-term, the Governmentis priorities for 2016-2017 include: i) fighting poverty and social exclusion, by implementing measures especially aimed at the most vulnerable groups; ii) reducing inequalities by further increasing the disposable household income; and iii) promoting access to essential goods and public services for all citizens. This aspect will be reinforced in the fight against poverty and in protecting human dignity. The structural intervention intended for these areas shall therefore be underpinned by sustainable and multifaceted criteria. It will cover areas as diverse as health, education, a fairer and more inclusive labour market, income recovery and a more balanced distribution of income, through wage policy, social protection, and fiscal policy, adjusted to new social trends and guaranteeing minimum social standards to the most vulnerable people. In this context priority is given to SDG10 n Reducing inequalities. 
As mentioned above, the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development sets out clear economic, environmental and social goals, including concrete targets to combat climate change. In this context, two major international agreements were recently achieved: (1) a comprehensive global market-based mechanism for measuring aviation CO2 emissions within the framework of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO); and (2) the Amendment to the Montreal Protocol to reduce emissions of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), one of the most powerful greenhouse gases (GHG). The challenge in 2017 and in the coming years includes ensuring that 12 national authorities, the private sector and civil society uphold the implementation of agreed commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, increase their share of renewable and clean energy, improve energy efficiency and increase the interconnection capacity, thereby gradually reinforcing the level of ambition set out in the Paris Agreement. Such commitments may be reviewed in 2018. In this context, the responses to climate change (mitigation and adaptation policies) should be framed and integrated so as to promote the proper planning and development of a resilient, competitive and low-carbon economy. Accordingly, the high relevance of SDG13 n Climate Action should be noted. 
Finally, in a geopolitical context, Portugal is the largest coastal Member State of the European Union, and as such plays a central role in the Atlantic basin. Its maritime area covers about 4 million km\0x2264 of continuous coastline, establishing the breadth of an inter-territorial sea that brings both an archipelagic and an Atlantic dimensions to the country. Consequently, Portugal plays a relevant role in ocean sustainability and governance. Considering the importance of the Sea from the point of view of its History, geography and identity, Portugal has been supporting the United Nations efforts to promote a global mobilization for the protection of the oceans and the sustainable exploitation of their resources. As seldom before, 2017 will be a particularly intense, rich and demanding year regarding the thematic area of Oceans within the United Nations framework, calling its Member States to make additional efforts towards political and diplomatic mobilization and involvement in several ongoing negotiations, in order to meet the challenges ahead. This framework supports the prioritization of a last, but not least important SDG, SDG14 n Protecting Marine Life. 
 
 
National ambition to achieve sustainable development 
Regarding the national commitment to sustainable development, enshrined in the Constitution, Portugal volunteers to present its national efforts to review the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the 5th High-level Political Forum in the year whose focus theme is poverty eradication and promoting prosperity in a changing world. The set of goals to be reviewed in depth at the global level this year are SDG 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 14 and 17. The fact that 3 of the national priorities that have been identified are to be reviewed this year should also be underlined. 
This report sets out the national voluntary review of the implementation process of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as a result of inter-ministerial coordination and public consultation efforts. It reflects the national perspective on each of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals, identifies priorities and challenges, policies and initiatives contributing towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda, and sharing good practices and national measures with the world. 
Much more than just a reporting exercise, this document testifies Portugalis strong commitment to sustainable development, human rights and multilateralism embodied in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
 
As indicated by the economic and social dimensions of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic, it is for the State to promote the well-being, quality of life and real equality amongst the Portuguese people as well as the realization of economic, social, cultural, educational and environmental rights, through the modernization of economic and social structure. The promotion of social justice is viewed as the protection of the most vulnerable and disadvantaged people, the guarantee of equal opportunities and the correction of inequalities in the distribution of wealth and income. Thus, the State must ensure the enjoyment of human rights, including the rights of access to water and sanitation, to adequate housing, education and labour, as well as the respect for the constitutional principle of equality and non-discrimination, which is fundamental to promote equal 14 opportunities and overcome economic, social and cultural rights inequalities. 
Structural challenges, such as poverty and social exclusion, require action at various levels, in the medium and long term: a more comprehensive education system favouring the reduction of primary income inequalities and acting to sever the intergenerational transmission of poverty; a more balanced distribution of income, through social transfers and taxes; a more inclusive and sustainable labour market; a more effective and efficient social protection system that is able to adjust to social changes. In this context, the integration of people at risk of poverty and the fight against social exclusion remain key goals for any economy that wishes to be competitive and sustainable. Such actions and objectives are found in the Grandes Op\0xC1\0x0131es do Plano for 2016-19 (Major Planning Options 2016-2019) drafted by this Constitutional Government, in line with the Programa Nacional de Reformas (National Reform Programme) and the Portugal 2020 Agreement Partnership. In this sense, Portugal prioritizes the fight against poverty and social exclusion among the most vulnerable groups (senior citizens, people in extreme poverty, people with disabilities, low-income workers), with a particular focus on child poverty, through the reinforcement of the support provided to families with children and ensuring access to all education levels to avoid the perpetuation of the intergenerational cycle of exclusion and inequality. 
In terms of regional commitments, the Europe 2020 Strategy postulates the reduction of social exclusion and poverty risk as being essential for the promotion of social and economic cohesion of the region as well as for the achievement of an inclusive growth. Following the European commitment to lift at least 20 million people out of poverty and social exclusion by 2020, Portugal has set the target of reducing the number of people in poverty by at least 200,000 by 2020, strengthening social cohesion and the fight against inequalities in its multiple dimensions. 
In terms of its international commitments, Portugal is a Party to most of the main Human Rights commitments on the fight against poverty and inequality, namely the Charter of the United Nations (1945) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948); the United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (1963); the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1965); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979); the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988); the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989); the Agenda 21 (1992); the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006); and, finally, the Incheon Declaration (2015). 
It should be highlighted the role that Portugal has been playing in the context of its participation in the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), in the development of the projects \0xECBuilding National Skills Strategy, with integrated strategies to develop skills capable of boosting economic growth, employment and well-being, and Education 2030, designed to promote the discussion and development of innovative schooling models appropriate to the skills required today. 
The development co-operation with third countries, n a key vector of the Portuguese foreign policy n, is based on a broad national consensus between the political parties and civil society with the aim to eradicate poverty and achieve sustainable development, respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law in partner countries. Portugal structures its support in the Strategic Concept for Portuguese Co-operation 2014-2020 aimed at cooperation with the Pa\0xCCses Africanos de L\0xCCngua Oficial Portuguesa (PALOP) [Portuguese-speaking African countries] and East Timor, and in the context of the Comunidade dos Pa\0xCCses de L\0xCCngua Portuguesa (CPLP) [Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries]. 
	In particular, we highlight the Strategic Cooperation Programmes with East Timor, Cape Verde, Angola, 	15 

Mozambique, S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe and Guinea-Bissau, focusing on the capacity building for stronger institutions in the area of social protection, employment, training and social inclusion, and support for projects to fight poverty, promoting equal access to basic services in the partner countries. There was also support for the implementation and strengthening of the Social Protection Floor schemes of PALOP and East Timor under the Project ACTION/Portugal 2015-2018 (3.5 million euro), implemented by the International Labour Organisation (ILO) with the aim of enhancing and consolidating the social protection systems in those countries. It should also be noted that, in the context of the relationship between the Bank of Portugal and their counterparts in developing countries, the annual Cooperation Plan sponsors meetings dedicated to the issues of inclusion and financial training. 
In the framework of the National Reform Program, we wish to point out measures referring to cohesion and social equality, among which those that aim to fight poverty in children and young people, and support to families with more young children. The National Strategy on the Rights of Children 2017-2020 promotes an integrated approach in the fight against poverty and makes use of proximity measures and the reformulation of the levels of income in the access to family allowance. It also envisages a system of indicators to be vigilant of situations of social precariousness, fighting school dropouts and failure, guaranteeing the right to preschool education for all children. 
The National Youth Guarantee Implementation Plan intends to enhance the abilities of young people and their integration into employment, social and labour market policy, as a way to reduce inequalities, with a special focus on the risk of social exclusion in marginalized communities. Also, special attention should be given to programmes such as: Apoio Social Escolar (social educational support), ensuring the costs of school materials, meals and transportation in support of families in need with children in school age; Educational Fields in need of Priority Intervention, providing additional support and resources for schools in disadvantaged backgrounds to promote success at school and reduce absenteeism and violence; and Escolhas (lit. Choices), which supports projects aimed at the integration of children and young people from vulnerable communities with a priority in vocational training, digital inclusion and the empowerment of young people. 
The inclusion of persons with disabilities also constitutes a central priority of the Government. Among the measures to be developed, the new Social Allowance for Inclusion simplifies the framework of existing benefits schemes, with an aim to promote principles of citizenship, to fight poverty and promote active inclusion in the labour market of persons with disabilities. This measure takes an integrated approach to the beneficiaries needs, adapting it throughout the life of the individual, with a focus in the protection during active age, and itis foreseen to enter into force already in 2017. 
Another national aim will be to consolidate the prevention and intervention in homelessness cases, so that nobody has the need to remain in the streets for lack of alternatives, and a new National Strategy for the Integration of People in Situation of Homelessness 2017-2023 is being drafted. 
Within the scope of the promotion of access to the health services, the expansion of the Rede Nacional de Cuidados Continuados (National Network of the Integrated Continued Care) answers the challenges derived from the aging of the population, namely in the availability of services and continued care at home or in a clinic, that guarantees support to elderly citizens or those in state of dependence. The deepening of the Cuidados Continuados de Sa\0x02D9de Mental (Continued Mental Healthcare) is also foreseen, as well as of other areas that require a more specific intervention, as it is the case of dementia. 
16 
In the field of promotion of gender equality, the Fifth National Plan for Gender Equality, Citizenship and Non- Discrimination 2014-2017 and the Strategic Plan for Migrations 2015-2020 address, in a structural approach and transverse manner, the inequalities and the discrimination based on gender, fighting off the risk of poverty of women throughout life. In particular, the plan aims to combat wage disparities; the promotion of a more balanced share of domestic work; the promotion of mechanisms of balanced representation in the top decisionmaking positions; the monitoring of the social instalments of the solidarity subsystem with a gender balance perspective; the monitoring of the situations of single-parent families who benefit of the system of the family allowance, in particular those made of women; and the actions of outreach and training that integrate the gender dimension aimed at professionals and social care workers who deal with vulnerable populations. Also, the Fifth National Plan for the Prevention and Fight against Domestic Violence and Gender Violence aims to fight all forms of gender violence. 
The Strategic Plan for Migrations 2015-2020 is the national inter-ministerial political instrument that aims to address a new, complex and challenging migratory situation, seeking to give an answer to the demographic deficit, the consolidation of the integration and qualification of the resident migrant communities, the inclusion and qualification of new nationals, international mobility, the valuation of the attractiveness of the country and the articulation between immigration and emigration, as well as the support in the return and reintegration of migrants. Regarding the access of migrants to the Portuguese Social Security system, it should be noted the services and the intervention developed in the scope of the National Centres to Support Migrant Integration. Among the available state services, there is a delegation of the Social Security system specialized in the needs of migrants, and the Cabinet of Social Support that takes care of situations of humanitarian emergency and articulates with the Social Security system, promoting a specialized support for migrants in a very vulnerable situation and in risk of poverty. 
On the other hand, the National Roma Integration Strategy 2013-2020 establishes the priorities of public policies for the integration of the Roma communities, in the education, habitation, health and employment market, including in the fields of discrimination, mediation and gender equality, involving different areas of governance. 
Regarding the foreign population and the stateless people who live or find themselves in Portugal, the Constitution safeguards rights identical to those enjoyed by the Portuguese citizens, as well as their duties and responsibilities. In this framework, we note the continued positive score of the financial balances of the Social Security system with foreigners, reinforcing the notion that immigration in Portugal is essentially employed and active. Thus, economically productive and, inherently, taxpaying immigrants will be more and more necessary to support the sustainability of the Social Security system. 
Regarding the promotion of financial inclusion training, the National Financial Education Plan 2016-2020 aims to contribute to raising the level of financial literacy of citizens and contribute to increase the welfare of people and the stability of the financial system. The Plan is based on 7 objectives: i) improving financial knowledge and attitudes; ii) enhancing knowledge and skills in the use of digital financial services; iii) support financial inclusion; iv) developing saving habits; v) promoting the responsible use of the credit; vi) creating habits of caution; and vii) strengthening knowledge in business. 
It should also be noted that Portuguese citizens are entitled to acquire, at a reduced cost, a set of essential banking services, in particular: the opening and running of an account; the provision of a debit card for the handling of that account; access to management of an account by means of automated teller machines, internet, telephone and service counters of the financial institution; make deposits and withdrawals, payments for goods and services, direct debits and bank transfers, without restriction on the number of operations that 17 may be carried out. 
In this context, Portugal faces challenges related to different dimensions of poverty, especially: i) for the workers with low income levels or with unstable labour relations; ii) for the long term unemployed who have difficulty re-entering the labour market (especially for people over the age of 50); iii) for the elders; and iv) for the marginalized social groups that endure discrimination in the access to the labour market. The strategy of the Government makes use of extraordinary measures of protection to the long term unemployed; the sustainability of the Social Security system; and the reinstatement of social support schemes that guarantee the social minima to citizens in more vulnerable situations, as the Rendimento Social de Inser\0xC1\0x201Eo (Social Integration Income) and the Complemento Solid\0xB7rio para Idosos (Senior Citizens Pension Supplement), as well as the reinstatement of the rules of update of the pensions and other social instalments. As a response to the aforementioned challenges, the strategic response under development includes incentives to enter the labour market, raising the social integration income, expanding the number of beneficiaries covered by the senior citizens pension supplement, and the fight against discrimination in the access to basic goods and services and to decent work, namely correcting structural disadvantages to promote womenis participation in the labour market. 

 
Within the Portuguese constitutional framework, we can identify the following objectives of the agricultural policy: i) increase the agricultural production and productivity, enhance competitiveness and ensure the quality of products and their effective marketing, a better supply of the countryis needs and more exports; ii) create the necessary conditions for reaching effective equality between farm labour and other professions and avoid unfavourable trading positions for the agricultural sector in relation with other sectors; and iii) ensure the 
rational use and management of soils and other natural resources as well as maintaining their capacity to 
                                                                                              18 regenerate. 	
In terms of agricultural activity, in the framework of the current National Reform Plan, the importance of developing infrastructure and business environment in the improvement of the agricultural activity itself, ensuring a more harmonious and sustainable rural development, should be stressed. In particular, it seeks to ensure that the investments in expansion and rehabilitation of the national irrigation network are continued, to develop a competitive and sustainable agriculture, as well as for the sustainability and conservation of rural territories. 
On the economic value of agricultural and forestry activities and their routing to the market, and also the value of rural land, the fundamental guidelines of Major Planning Options for 2016-19 aim to improve the quality of products, guaranteeing food security and increase the productivity of the factors of production, with a view to support the internationalization of companies operating in the food supply chain and agro-forestry, and also in the substitution of imports on the domestic market, in order to achieve a balance in agricultural trade balance in the long term. Equally important is the reinforcement of support given to small agriculture, to the rejuvenation of the social fabric in rural areas, with a focus on agricultural entrepreneurship, and to the promotion and reinforcement of the strategies and local partnerships. 
In the regional context, the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) already contains many of the concerns expressed in the SDGs, ensuring safety and quality in the supply of food products, as well as contributing to the sustainability of the rural economy, in parallel with the concern for sustainable management of natural resources in respect for future generations, in a permanent perspective of integration of the new challenges that the world faces today. It is therefore important to maximize the contribution of the CAP in achieving SDGs, through a coordinated approach, anticipating and developing measures in the future, both at EU level and at national level, including policies, measures and instruments existing at national level in the first and the second pillars of the CAP, respectively financed by the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD). 
Within the scope of the first pillar of the CAP there is a definition of: i) regimes of payments directly to the farmers, that include a base payment; ii) payment for young farmers with the aim of rejuvenating the sector; iii) redistributive payment; iv) regimes for small agriculture, allowing a better fit between small farms and the requirements of the policies; v) regimes of associated support, in the sectors or regions in special situations, for economic reasons, either environmental and/or social; and vi) payment for agricultural practices that benefit the climate and the environment (greening), contributing to the improvement of the environmental performance of the agricultural activity. 
On the other hand, through the 2014-2020 Rural Development Programme for mainland Portugal (RDP 2020), we seek to promote investments in farming with the aim of increasing the capacity to generate added value, increase productivity, promote a more efficient use of resources (water, soil and energy) and support the productive and social tissue in rural areas. 
In the framework of the European Structural and Investment Funds, the integrated approach to territorial development is achieved through the Community-Led Local Development, which puts the focus on the central role of the agricultural sector for local development, granting specific support for small farmers and small investments in farming, also in processing and marketing of agricultural products. Moreover, there is the need to support diversification of on-farm activities such as tourism, linked with the renewal of traditional villages, the promotion of quality products and the development of short supply chains and local markets, as a means to 19 

facilitate market access for small producers. 
In order to ensure sustainable food production systems and implement resilient agricultural practices, we would stress the importance of instruments and actions such as the National Action Plan for the Sustainable Use of Plant Protection Products (reduction of human health and environment risks), the production and certification of biological diverse seed mixtures, the National Apiculture Programme (provides technical assistance to beekeepers, promoting the apicultural products, honey and bee health, improving conditions for production, breeding and biodiversity, and the quality of honey and research), the maintenance of permanent grassland and permanent pasture (greening), the promotion of innovation operational groups in the context of the European Innovation Partnership for Agricultural Productivity and Sustainability, the technical and entrepreneurial capacity building of the assets of the forestry sector or the support to the organic and integrated production methods, provided for in the RDP 2020. 
Regarding genetic diversity, we wish to point out the promotion of the conservation and improvement of plant and animal genetic resources in the RDP 2020, supporting the conservation of local species that were in risk of extinction and the conservation and improvement of animal and plant genetic resources. This measure is highly interconnected with the National Plan for Plant Genetic Resources, the National Plan for Animal Genetic Resources and the National Programmes for Animal and Plant Genetic Improvement. 
Contributing to a supply of sufficient, nutritious and quality food, the National Strategy School Fruit Scheme has the main objective of promoting healthy eating habits, by introducing or reinforcing eating habits in children in order to disseminate healthy habits throughout the population \0xF3 with an intention to establish, in the next cycle, starting from 2017, free distribution to schools. The Strategy is strengthened by the free milk and fruit distribution programmes funded by the European Union. 
By incorporating the concern with a balanced nutritional diet, adjustments were made to the 2014-2020 Operational Program for Support to People in Need (Programa Operacional de Apoio \0x2021s Pessoas mais Carenciadas, or POAPMC), a program that provides food support that will shift its approach, from the current model of food distribution to a model of food safety, aiming at reaching a minimum of 60 thousand people per year. These changes were meant to reinforce the quantity and quality of the food being distributed to the programis beneficiaries, as well as the regularity of its distribution. 
Following some of the objectives of the Operational Program, a new food basket was defined, composed of 18 diverse products, including meat and fish, which takes into consideration the specific needs of five different social groups (children under 2 of age, children under 4 of age, children under 14 of age, adults and elderly persons), ensuring 50% of the monthly nutritional needs of the programis beneficiaries.   
In the field of social protection, the Rendimento Social de Inser\0xC1\0x201Eo (Social Integration Income) plays an important role as a measure to support people and families in serious economic need and at risk of social exclusion. In the field of health, contributing to end all forms of malnutrition, it is also worth mentioning the National Health Service, accessible to the entire population, and its National Child and Youth Health Programme, National Low-Risk Pregnancy Surveillance Programme, National School Health Programme, as well as the Maternal and Infant Referral Network. 
Within the scope of the research and technology for regional development, the National Network for Agricultural, Livestock and Forest experimentation, research and testing will be soon established.  
20 

Encouraging mutual dialogue, fairness and balance of the food supply chain, the Plataforma de Acompanhamento das Rela\0xC1\0x0131es na Cadeia Alimentar [Platform for Monitoring Food Chain Relations] introduces more transparency in commercial relations along the agri-food chain, namely in the distribution of value among all sectors of production, processing and distribution of agricultural and agri-food products. Specifically, we note the establishment of Observatories on formation of prices and margins (European Milk Market Observatory and the European Meat Market Observatory, National Observatory on Value Chain in the Agri-food Sector) and the relevance of GlobalAgriMar platform, providing information on products and markets, stimulating investment, export and internationalization of national businesses. 
In the Autonomous Region of the Azores, measures to assist local agricultural products are in place, in particular, the Azores 2014-2020 Rural Development Programme (PRORURAL+) which provides support for investments in agricultural enterprises, processing and marketing of agricultural products as well as measures supporting knowledge transfer, with the aim of increasing productivity and farmersi incomes, increasing resource efficiency and job creation. Moreover, we underline the existence of measures to prevent possible disasters, supporting farms to prevent situation that destroy natural ecosystems, changing watercourses, or soil erosion. 
International co-operation has been strengthening cross-border cooperation, not only at the level of the Iberian Peninsula, but also in the Mediterranean region. Portugal is part of the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area 2018-2027, for sustainable water management and food production systems, involving funds totalling 600 million euro, with a contribution from the European Unionis Horizon 2020 programme. 
Aiming to correct and prevent restrictions and distortions in world agricultural markets, it was decided, in the European context, to eliminate export subsidy, and control export credits and international food aid, on the date of adoption of the Ministerial Decision on Export Competition in the World Trade Organizationis 10th Ministerial Conference (Nairobi, December 19 2015).  
In addition, by pursuing a policy of opening up to new international markets, important sanitary and phytosanitary agreements have been signed with third countries, enabling the removal of restrictions to international agricultural trade national agro-industrial products. 

 
The right to health protection is enshrined in the Constitution, as well as the duty to defend and promote it, and this is carried out by means of a national health service that shall be universal and general and, taking into account the economic and social conditions of each citizen, tending-towards-free health services. Created in 1979, the National Health Service (NHS) was built i) to be universal in terms of the population covered; ii) to provide a comprehensive integrated healthcare or ensure that it is provided; iii) to tend to be free-of-charge for 
patients, taking account of citizensi economic and social circumstances; iv) to guarantee equal access for 
22 patients, mitigating the effects of economic, geographic and any other inequalities in access to care. 	
In the context of its political priorities, the current Government recognises access for all to public services, including health, as its decisive impact favours cohesion and curtails inequalities. As such, ensuring the sustainability and promoting the reform of the NHS is of particular importance in the National Reform Plan, in line with the Portugal 2020, framing the enlargement of the supply of social services and healthcare, adapting to emerging needs, with a view to promoting the transition from institutional to proximity-based care. 
The National Health Plan 2020 draws up a strategic direction to the NHS framework and is a crucial element of the health policy in Portugal, including health promotion and disease prevention. The document is based on 4 components (Citizenship in Health; Equity and Adequate Access to Health Care Services; Health Care Quality; and Healthy Policies) and sets main targets to reduce the rate of premature (under the age of 70) mortality to less than 20%, to increase by 30% the healthy life expectancy at age 65, and at the same time reduce the risk factors associated with non-communicable diseases, in particular on tobacco smoking, exposure to tobacco smoke and childhood obesity. 
The National Low-Risk Pregnancy Surveillance Programme will continue its work from the beginning of the life cycle, through comprehensive preventive and individualized care, under the model of continuous monitoring for prenatal and neonatal care provided to pregnant women, and integrated in the Maternal and Infant Referral Network, linking primary health care and hospital care. The National Child and Youth Health Programme is also part of this network, strengthening investment in youth issues related to child development, emotional and behavioural disorders and abusive treatment. The strategies to support and detect children with special needs, which are at risk or are particularly vulnerable, will therefore be fostered. 
The strategies identified above involve the maintenance and development of systems of interaction between families and institutions, including health, ensuring that children with special needs and/or vulnerable are duly identified and flagged at an early stage. To that extent, the achievement of the objectives laid down in the National Early Childhood Intervention System and the consolidation of the A\0xC1\0x201Eo de Sa\0x02D9de Para Crian\0xC1as e Jovens em Risco (Health Action for Children and Youth at Risk) it must be ensured. The contribution of the Rede Nacional de Apoio \0x2021s V\0xCCtimas de Viol\0xCDncia Dom\0xC8stica (National Network of Support to Victims of Domestic Violence) should also be mentioned in this regard, articulating the many entities that follow up on these issues, including in the field of health and protection of children and young people. 
The development and expansion of monitoring of indicators of the National Child and Youth Health Programme will be continued through the existing instruments to develop the Not\0xCCcia de Nascimento digital (Electronic Birth Record Information); Boletim de Sa\0x02D9de da Gr\0xB7vida (personal health record for pregnant women) and eBoletim de Sa\0x02D9de Infantil (electronic personal child health record). 
We also emphasize the importance of the National Vaccination Programme, set up in 1965, to vaccinate the population, especially children, in an organized manner, universal, free and in continuity. In the beginning there were 6 diseases being covered and currently the programme protects against 13 diseases. The programme also seeks to recommend appropriate strategies, based on the best scientific evidence available, on the impact of the disease and vaccination in order to achieve efficiency gains in health. In particular, the National Health Plan determines the development of priority health programmes in 11 areas, including viral hepatitis, HIV/AIDS infection and Tuberculosis. 
From another perspective, the National School Health Programme is the guiding instrument in terms of national policies with regard to health promotion and well-being at school and is designed to contribute to 23 better health, education, more equity and stronger involvement and accountability of all with the welfare and quality of life of children and young people. As part of the promotion of school settings favouring healthier lifestyles and to improve health literacy, the programme operates in the fields of mental health, education and social-emotional skills, emotional and sexual education, healthy nutrition and physical activities, personal hygiene and healthy habits, sleep and rest, postural education, prevention of tobacco smoking, alcohol and consumption of psychoactive substances, as well as addictive behaviour without the use of substances. 
In the field of youth policies, it should also be noted that the mechanisms set up to ensure full support to the welfare of young people have been implemented through the Cuida-te (Take Care) programme comprising of different methodologies, with an emphasis on primary prevention tools, operating in areas such as healthy nutrition and obesity, prevention of harmful consumptions and sexual and reproductive health. As examples, Sexualidade em Linha (Sexuality Line) is a telephone information service, free of charge, anonymous and confidential, that offers guidance and counselling in the area of sexual and reproductive health, and the National Observatory of the Physical Activity, Physical Aptitude and Sport, which has the mission to identify the Portuguese populationis sporting habits, its sedentary behaviour and physical aptitude, including personal, social, physical and environmental factors, over the years. 
The guidelines of the World Health Organization, the European Commission and the Council of Europe are materialized in the Health Promotion and Education Support Programme, in order to keep i) promoting health literacy; ii) promoting attitudes and values that support healthy behaviour; iii) valuing behaviours that lead to healthy lifestyles; iv) creating environmental conditions for a health-promoting school; v) promoting universal access to health education in schools; vi) the supply of health education in schools; vii) consolidating the support to projects in the school environment. 
 
In this sense, the promotion of mental health is a priority since it is the field of health that deals more effectively with the feelings, emotions, and frustrations, contributing to our ability to think and make decisions. Emotional and behavioural disorders in school should be articulated with the National Mental Health Programme. Many of the behavioural problems of children start at school age and may result from difficulties in adaptation that can be prevented, or else become problematic forms of anxiety and depression, even potentiating risk behaviour in adolescence. 
We should also stress the relevance of the National Plan for the Reduction of Addictive Behaviours and Dependencies 2013-2020, for the promotion of reduction in the consumption of psychoactive substances, prevention of addictive behaviours and reduction of dependency, including precise objectives, by delaying the start of consumption, the reduction of prevalence of hazardous and morbidity related to the consumption of psychoactive substances. Moreover, the extension of the special tax on the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages of lesser nutritional value and alcoholic beverages seeks to discourage their consumption and save costs of the National Health Service. 
Contributing to the reduction of the number of deaths and injuries suffered due to road accidents, the National Accident Prevention Programme aims to promote safety and prevent unintentional accidents, improve emergency and to ensure that quality and integrated services for victims of injuries and trauma are in place. The Project Beb\0xC8s, Crian\0xC1as & Jovens em Seguran\0xC1a (Keeping Babies, Children & Youth Safe) strive for improved literacy in childrenis road safety and the adoption of safe behaviour by pregnant women, parents and families when transporting children in the car. 
In the frameworks of the NHS, the National Reproductive Health Programme normalizes activities of family planning. Access to family planning appointments shall be free and timely scheduled, as well as free 24 distribution of contraceptives. Likewise, it should also develop links between primary care and gynaecology/obstetrics services in the Coordinating Functional Units, to ensure timely reporting of the risk. 
From the initiatives taken to implement the World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, we highlight in particular the protection from exposure to environmental smoke in enclosed public places and means of transport (2007). The prohibition of advertisement and sponsorship of tobacco products, since 1982, has been strengthened, and also in the terms of sale. In addition, smoking prevention was instated in the pre and post graduations of healthcare professionals, and a protocol of doctorsi appointments in the NHS was created for intensive support to smokers trying to cease the habit. Also, Portugal has ratified the WHO Protocol on the elimination of the illicit trade of the tobacco, contributing to the elimination of all the forms of illicit tobacco trade, through administrative cooperation, scientific and legal, of international scope. 
In 2012, the National Programme for Prevention and Control of Tobacco was set up, structured around three main nuclear headings: i) prevent the initiation of consumption among young people; ii) protection from exposure to environmental smoke; and iii) promotion of cessation of use. These 3 pillars are complemented by strategies to promote literacy and create a social environment favourable to tobacco control and monitoring initiatives, training, research and promotion of best practices, at the same time aiming to reduce inequalities, and in particular health inequalities linked to regional prevention, treatment and control of smoking. The Programme supports international cooperation and collaborative work with the European Commission and the WHO. In addition, tobacco taxation contributes to discourage its consumption. 
In October 2016, the opening of the Centro de Emerg\0xCDncias em Sa\0x02D9de P\0x02D9blica (CESP) [Public Health Emergency 
Operations Centre] has strengthened the capacity devoted to the management of information in the context of 
public health emergencies in terms of structures, equipment and tools to support management. The CESP is part of the EU and international Public Health Emergency Operations Centre Network, alert systems and International Health Regulation (IHR). 
The interconnection between human health and the quality of the environment, and in this context the control of the quality of the water for human consumption and the control of the quality of air should also me mentioned. On the other hand, in the perspective that climatic change will increase the possibility of natural occurrence of imported diseases, more frequent in other geo-climatic areas, our national historical knowledge of the Lusophone reality, associated to the scientific capacity in the field of climate change (heat waves, e.g.), is a decisive factor regarding qualification in this field. 
The Plan for Immigrant Integration, in what concerns health and the articulation between different entities, beyond the already mentioned aspects of access to the NHS, assures: i) implementation of measures aiming at the promotion of the access of immigrants to the NHS; ii) implementation of a plan of intercultural training for the professionals of the NHS; iii) development of partnerships for the promotion of access of migrants to the health service in Portugal; iv) institutionalization of procedures with a view to better manage the agreements of health and facilitation of access to immigrants and its companions to the services of health and promotion of the mental health of migrants. 
Up to 2020, with the Strategic Plan for Migrations, other measures of relief are foreseen: i) clarification of the normative framework relative to the access of migrants in irregular situation to the NHS; ii) implementation and monitoring of the NHS Welcome Manual for Foreign Citizens; iii) increment the monitoring of health in vulnerable populations, namely migrants; iv) creation of accessible information on the health system; v) promotion of training for the professionals of health concerning the needs of migrants in the area of health; 25 

and vi) improvement of the national and European knowledge in the area of the health of migrants. 
In the context of welcoming refugees, in addition to the analysis of their health status on arrival, attention should be paid to the vulnerabilities and risks related to the individual health of migrants travelling to and from Portugal. In response to these challenges, legal frameworks have been defined and measures implemented to promote the health of migrants, including specific action plans for the integration of migrants (currently being implemented in Portugal since 2007) and with health protection measures for the most vulnerable groups. More than guaranteeing access to health to foreign nationals staying legally, we have come a long way towards giving equal access for citizens in irregular situation. 
In the context of international cooperation, the law also allows nationals from the PALOP to travel to Portugal for medical treatment, under cooperation agreements in the field of health. On the other hand, the constant updating of infrastructure capacity, coordination with international partners and the mobilization of national experts to respond to international emergencies strengthens the national capacity in the Portuguese speaking African countries. In the field of capacity building, in addition to the contributions made with the movement of professionals and other measures for the fight against the Ebola outbreak (classified by the WHO as a Public Health Emergency of International Concern), which exceeded expenditure of 1.1 million euro, initiatives are also being undertaken in the area of research and technological development, in support of the Networks of Excellence in Southern and West Africa for capacity building of partner institutions to meet the challenges concerned. 
 
 
The right to education is enshrined in the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and it is structural to guarantee the access to equal opportunities, overcome economic, social, and cultural inequalities, personal development and increase the spirit of tolerance and mutual understanding, solidarity and social responsibility and democratic participation in collective life. It is for the State to regulate the field of public education policy, assuming the tasks of: i) ensuring the provision of compulsory, free and universal basic education; ii) ensure the continuing education and eradicate illiteracy; iii) ensuring access to higher levels of education and research; iv) the progressive establishment of free education at all levels of education; v) and ensure the special and 26 adequate education to disabled children of immigrants. Such actions are included, in particular, in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19, in line with the Portugal 2020 and the National Reform Programme, assuming as priority action areas the reduction of failure and premature school absenteeism, the access to education, the qualification of adults and renovation and innovation in the education system.  
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is involved in the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 Strategy, in particular as regards the objectives of promoting smart and inclusive growth. Also in the framework of the European Union, we highlight Portugalis contribution in the Council of Europe, emphasizing the centrality of education for citizenship and the promotion of European values. Also worth mentioning are: the Portuguese participation at the meeting of the Mediterranean Ministers of Education (2016) within the framework of the Mediterranean Strategy on Education for Sustainable Development \0xF3 in which the countries of Southern Europe and Northern African countries developed an integrated regional strategy, especially in the field of education; the membership in the Iberian-American Youth Organization, collaborating in the preparation of its Action Plan based on the Sustainable Development Goals; the Portuguese participation at the regional consultative meeting of UNESCO held in Paris (2016), which discussed the responsibilities of the various stakeholders and national governments. 
In terms of international commitments, Portugal is a party to most of the core treaties that address the universal right to education, with a view to the full development of the human personality. These are: the Charter of the United Nations (1945) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948); the International 
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979); the World Declaration on Education for All (1990); the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006); and the Incheon Declaration (2015). 
In the context of the work being done by the National Commission for UNESCO in the field of education for sustainable development, we highlight in particular the Educational Programme \0xECGEA n Mother Earth with training courses on the 2030 Agenda, the preparation of an Educational Kit "Education for Global Citizenship n co-operation with the CPLP schools, the adoption of a Training Manual \0xECGetting climate-ready for teachers at UNESCO and the creation of UNESCO Chairs \0xECThe Ocean's Cultural Heritage (along with Brazil, Cape Verde, Colombia and Spain) and \0xECGeoparks, Sustainable Regional Development and Healthy Lifestyles (with Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Spain, Mexico, Mozambique) at university level. 
With regard to cooperation with partner countries, Portugal has been a driver for developing measures and actions within the CPLP, having also supported other countries in the development of their education systems. In this sense, we wish to make reference to: i) the extension of the Portuguese schools network in Macao, East Timor, Angola and Mozambique; ii) the opening of a school in Cape Verde and one in S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe, as well as contacts with a view to opening of a school in Brazil; iii) several teachers to train and cooperate locally with teachers from East Timor, in the context of the project Centros de Aprendizagem e Forma\0xC1\0x201Eo Escolar (CAFE) [Learning and Education Centres]; and iv) cooperation in technical advice on educational services in collaboration with the Cam\0x0131es n Instituto da Coopera\0xC1\0x201Eo e da L\0xCCngua, I.P. In addition, Portugal has co-operation protocols for hosting foreign students (namely from the Portuguese speaking countries), in particular at university level. Numerous measures have also been promoted by the state, civil society and foundations for awarding scholarships to those students. 
Portuguese Cooperation considers the investment in the field of the education, training and science as 27 structural for the development of the human and social capital of the partner countries, in order to have a multiplying effect with a view to achieve sustainable development. In this context, we wish to point out the projects that aim at structuring the systems of basic, secondary and professional education of partner countries, as well as of higher education, in partnership with civil society organizations, foundations or with institutions of higher education in Portugal. 
Although exponential advances in the qualification of the Portuguese and gradual improvements in the literacy of younger generations are recognized by international institutions, some challenges still persist in the road towards universal access to the right to the education, to which we are currently seeking to answer. 
Considering the high rates of school retention, the significant share of early school absenteeism and the strong correlation between socio-economic status of families and their results/schooling, the National Programme to Promote Educational Achievement has been launched with the main objective to support the success of all students, through which all schools of basic education have to draw strategic plans of action, with a special focus on the work done in the classroom, identifying fields of permanent additional training for the development of actions tailored for the reality of each school community, in convergence with the actions being done at municipality level. 
In addition to these programmes, a mentoring scheme for all pupils accumulating failures has also been made available as an additional support and guidance for pupils at risk of dropping out of school. In the same line, documental analysis has been produced, developing an integrated work between the Profile of the Pupils after completing Compulsory Education, the definition of Essential Learning, Inclusive Education and the Strategy of Education for the Citizenship. There are still measures being implemented to guarantee the enlargement, the quality and the flexibility of the professional courses, at the level of secondary education, in accordance with European standards. This articulated set of politics will allow to reduce the school absenteeism to 10% by 2020 and to guarantee that 55% of the students in secondary education are in a professionalizing course. 
By recognizing the need for continued learning throughout life and the low qualification of the Portuguese adult population, education and training for adults has also been a priority field of improvement, namely with the creation of the Programa Qualifica (2016), that aims to guide, train and certify about 1 million adults with low qualification, until 2020, through a network of 300 centres distributed around the country, in close collaboration with the education sector and the labour market. 
It is still worth mentioning the: Programme of School Sport, that aims to promote a healthy lifestyle, of ethical values and principles of active citizenship; and the Support Units to High Performance in Schools with the aim of conciliating school success with sports success. 
Despite pre-school attendance being preponderant on the Portuguese population, and following the OECD and EU averages, a large share of supply is ensured by private operators, making it necessary to ensure all families access to quality services, regardless of their economic and financial capacity. In this regard there are: effective universal provision of pre-school education for children with 4 and 5 years and continued efforts to extend it to children with 3 years of age, by 2019; the drafting of the Curriculum Guidelines for Pre-School Education, ensuring coordination among experts and reference point for national and international sectorial organizations (for instance, in the context of OECD Starting Strong network); and a training plan for nursery teachers, with the aim to promote quality and equity in the education network. 
With regard to ensuring access of children and young people to school and education, Portugal has further 
                                                                                              28 developed and strengthened the following programmes: i) Apoio Social Escolar (social educational support), ensuring the costs of school materials, meals and transportation in support of families in need with children of school age; ii) Educational Fields in need of Priority Intervention, providing additional support and resources for schools in disadvantaged backgrounds to promote success at school and reduce absenteeism and violence; iii) Choices, which supports projects aimed at the integration of children and young people from vulnerable communities with a priority in vocational training, digital inclusion and the empowerment of young people; and iv) the Portuguese as Non Mother Tongue for immigrant students, aimed at reinforcing their linguistic skills and their integration in Portugal and in the educational system. 
Also, the challenge of the high rates of school failure and premature school absenteeism among Roma children and youth deserves a reference here, since we seek to answer it with the National Strategy for the Integration of Roma Communities, along with programs such as the Program of Attribution of Scholarships in Higher Education to Roma Students, stimulating their permanence in the educational system. However, the burden that the socio-economic conditions continue to have in the results and retention rates in schools suggests that this work will need to be further consolidated. 
In the field of special educational needs, Portugal has come to develop a model of inclusion of these pupils in schools and groups of regular education, following individual work plans. Portugal is a reference in the Inclusive Education, having moved from a segregating model of special schools to the current model, in which 98% of the children and young with special necessities are enlisted in the regular system. To this end, there are diverse measures of support, such as centres of technician-pedagogical resources and pedagogical adjustments. It will be the necessary to consolidate the monitoring of the learning path of these pupils. 
The prospect of an all-round education fostering the dimensions of citizenship and sustainable development is reflected in the National Strategy for Environmental Education 2017-2020, with a focus to de-carbonize society, through promotion of a circular economy and territorial development. Moreover, since Culture is understood as a tool for personal development and capacity building, training activities are promoted for global citizenship, by promoting the diversity of cultural and artistic expressions. 
It is relevant to point out the role of Culture as a factor of cohesion and reduction of asymmetries. Thus, from the joint action between the fields of Culture and education, the National Reading Plan was launched in 2006, with a view to develop abilities in the area of reading and writing, as well as widening and deepening the reading habits of the Portuguese society, namely in the school population. The new phase of the Plan (20172027) widens the scope of performance and the different recipients, of all sectors of society and all the age groups, considering the diverse areas of the knowledge in order to support and stimulate: i) programs especially designed to favour the social integration through reading; ii) the training of the different segments of the population - children, youth and adults; iii) the inclusion of people with specific needs; iv) the articulated development of a scientific, literary and artistic culture; e v) the access to knowledge and culture through technologies of information and communication. 
Another joint initiative between the Culture and the Education is the National Film Plan, created in 2013, as a program of literacy for cinema and for the dissemination of national cinematographic works in the school public, guaranteeing essential instruments to the reading and interpretation of cinematographic works for the pupils of enlisted schools of the plan.  
In parallel, there are projects of micro-pedagogies develop with schools by some services of the Culture sector, as the Museum goes to School project or workshops in school context or in museums, theatres and other 29 culture infrastructures. 
Furthermore, the adoption of the National Strategy on Education for Development has the objective to promote global citizenship through processes of learning and sensitization of the Portuguese society for issues of development, in a context of increasing interdependence, with a view of action guided for social transformation. Against this background, the publication of the Referral of Education for Development assumes an especially important role with reference to the 2030 Agenda. In this sense, we highlight: Project 80, that promotes citizenship, entrepreneurship, establishment of associations, support, preservation of biodiversity and natural resources, through initiatives and proposals developed by pupils; the Eco-Schools, an international programme that intends to encourage action in the scope of the environmental education, through the supply of methodology, pedagogical training and materials; the Youth Parliament, an initiative of the Portuguese Parliament that targets young people in school age, aimed at promoting civic participation and understanding of democratic institutions; the Intercultural School Stamp, to reward the schools developing projects of appreciation of diversity as an opportunity and a source of learning for all; and the Schools Participatory Budget, allowing to the students to participate democratically in the management of their school and, in such a way, to strengthen their training for citizenship. 
Also, it also important to mention the adoption of the Referral of Education for Risk, destined to preschool education, basic and secondary, complemented with the General Civil Protection Course for Educators and Teachers, allowing the investment in strategies of knowledge, prevention and mitigation of risks with a view to gradually build a culture of security and resilience. 
Aimed at fighting disparities, we point out some of the measures being implemented at the level of Higher education, such as: i) the Plan for Gender Equality of the University of the Beira Interior, with the creation of the figure of the Ombudsman for Students, an independent agency that will appreciate all the complaints of the pupils on the aspects of their academic life; ii) the Refugee Support Platform and the diverse actions of sensitization on academic and professional recognition of titles; and iii) the existence of a special contingent (2%) for candidates with special educational or physical necessities and the scholarships made available by public and private entities for joint payment of the frequency of a superior course or with the completion of an obligatory professional training. 
With the intention to improve the diversity and quality in the supply of training in higher education, some professional courses for superior technicians were created (2014), as base for the development of a professional activity, for the personal development and the continuation of studies, opening the possibility to the conclusion of a cycle of degree studies. Of these, we highlight the Programme of Modernization and Valuation of Polytechnic Institutes (2016), in articulation with the strategy for the development of Cities and Regions with Knowledge. 
In order to promote the professional integration of the students of higher education, cooperation between universities, polytechnic institutes and companies is stimulated, to deepen the territorial connection of the institutions of higher education and to facilitate the transition between academy and the professional labour market, we highlight: i) the existence of Consortia and Networks at the European regional level (CRUSOE) and the participation in Cross Border Campuses with Spain, which allows the sharing of resources and the increase of competitiveness; and ii) the qualification and the requalification for employment in TIC, that are materialized in the promotion of doctorates in the companies and programs for the creation of start-ups. Still in this scope, the approval of the general guidelines for policies of internationalization of Higher education, Science and 30 Technology (2016), regarding cooperation with third countries, envisaged the support of partnerships of strategic scope and the relationship with the Portuguese academic and scientific communities living abroad, that can assert Portugal in Europe and the world and that can strengthen the capacity of attracting qualified human resources to Portugal. 
Finally, one last reference to the National Open Science Policy supported by a network of digital repositories, involving institutions of higher education and the system of science and technology, valuing and projecting the scientific production in Portuguese in the international context. Having as paradigm equality in training and scientific qualification, it facilitates knowledge transfer and it stimulates the social appropriation of science, in close articulation with the National Initiative Digital Abilities e.2030, taking advantage of the digital world to amplify the possibilities of access to information sharing, training, science and knowledge in general. 
 
Recalling that the principle of equality and non-discrimination is central in the formulation of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic, it should be noted that the promotion of social and legal equality between men and women was a constitutionally granted primary task of the State and the direct and active participation of men and women in political life is seen both as a condition and an instrument for the consolidation of the democratic system. This is particularly reflected in the National Reform Programme and in the Portugal 2020, as well as in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19 adopted by the current Government. The national Constitution attributes to the State, in the context of protection of the family, the fostering of conciliation between work and 31 

family life and enshrines maternity and paternity as outstanding social values.  
The Government assumed as priority areas: i) citizenship and equality in education; ii) a gender balanced representation in decision-making; iii) the labour market and conciliation; iv) sexual orientation and gender identity; and v) the fight against gender violence. To this end, it defined as guiding principles the strengthening of gender mainstreaming policies, the localization of these policies (at local and regional level) and cooperation in external relations (in particular within the framework of the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries (CPLP). It seeks to intervene systematically on the dimensions of the disadvantages that continue to affect women by acting closely in the design and implementation of public policies with non-governmental organizations promoting equality between women and men. 
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is involved in the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 Strategy, particularly regarding the objective of promoting inclusive growth and the European Pact for Gender Equality 2011-2020. Indeed, social cohesion is one of the pillars of this strategy, and it is understood that the promotion of gender equality and of new forms of reconciliation between work and family life is key to the European economic and social development. Within the Council of Europe, it should be noted, inter alia, the Convention on Preventing and Combating Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, which Portugal has firmly adopted in policies to combat violence against women. 
Regarding international commitments, Portugal is a party to most major human rights treaties, which relate to equality between men and women and womenis human rights, such as: the Charter of the United Nations (1945) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948); the International Covenant on Civil and Political 
Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979); the Agenda 21 (1992), and the United Nations Security Council Resolution nr 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (2000). Particular attention is given to the Programme of Action adopted at the International Conference in Cairo (1994) and the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action (1995), and revisions, as they offer key guidance in this context. 
In cooperation with partner countries, Portugal has been a driver for developing measures and actions under the non-discrimination and gender equality within the Comunidade dos Pa\0xCCses de L\0xCCngua Portuguesa (CPLP), and it hosted in Lisbon, the 2th Meeting of the CPLP Ministers responsible for Gender Equality on \0xECGender, Violence and Health (2010). The Meeting resulted in the Lisbon Resolution, which permanently established the Ministerial Meeting and included a proposal for a Strategic Cooperation Plan for Gender Equality and Womenis Empowerment in the CPLP, within which we have sought to create a system of sectorial and cross-cutting policy in the area of equality and gender equity. On this basis, the 3rd Meeting of the CPLP Ministers in Maputo (2014), revised the Action Plan for the Promotion of Gender Equality and equity in the CPLP (2016-2018). Mention should also be made to the Strategic Concept for Portuguese Co-operation 2014-2020, based on the Portuguese Cooperation Strategy for Gender Equality 2010, which aims at combating all forms of violence against women and girls, and to promoting the integration of gender equality into the Portuguese Cooperation system. 
It should be noted in this context the Sectorial Action Plan for Gender Equality 2014-2017 for National Defence, which promotes the strengthening of institutional capacity for promoting gender equality in partner countries, and the integration of needs and perspectives of women in situations of conflict/post conflict co-operation. Still in the scope of cooperation, the Second National Action Plan to Implement the Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (2000) 2014-2018 foresees diverse measures oriented to the prevention and combat to gender violence, including sexual violence, in the diplomatic, military, security, justice and 32 development activities, at the national and international level. 
The Fifth National Plan for Gender Equality, Citizenship and Non-Discrimination 2014-2017 is the implementing instrument of the national public policies aimed at promoting gender equality and the fight against discrimination based on sex and sexual orientation. The plan falls in the commitments made by Portugal in universal and regional contexts and represents the Portuguese response to this urgent challenge which remains a serious breach of Human Rights violations and an impediment to the sustainable development. 
In this field, we also highlight the Agenda for the Equality in the Labour Market and Companies, which, in the context of social agreements and the tripartite dialogue (Government, employers and trade unions), adopts a structural approach to the fight against inequalities between women and men, strategically focusing on wage disparities; occupational segregation; parenthood; measures for reconciling professional, family and personal life; and parity in decision-making positions. The Government is drafting legislative modifications and actions that intervene in a decisive manner in these areas, promoting, inter alia, the imposition of minimum thresholds of representation in positions of decision-making in public companies and publicly traded companies, the online dissemination of conciliation instruments, the attribution of joint responsibilities with the companies in this matter, to adopt specific measures of structural combat to the wage disparity and the promotion of a balanced share of the work between women and men. 
It is still worth mentioning the cross-sectorial and localization approach that the Government has been implementing. The Fifth National Plan referred above places a significant focus in gender mainstreaming, shaping politics and promoting the adoption of specific actions in some sectors, namely of sectorial plans for the equality, nomination of focal points and accomplishment of action of training. In the perspective of the crosssectoral approach, the integration of the gender perspective in the elaboration of the State Budget (gender budgeting), introduced for the first time in 2016, by referring the amounts invested in this area, should be noted. This work is to be consolidated and widened. 
Regarding localization, at the local level we should highlight the municipal plans for equality, elaborated in articulation with the Commission for the Citizenship and Gender Equality, as key instruments in the combat to local inequalities and in the definition of solutions for specific economic, social and cultural problems that demand a specialized knowledge and whose effectiveness alone can be guaranteed if produced and executed at the local level, in harmony with the national political guidelines. In this context, we must point out the role of local council members for equality, as essential focal points for a constructive collaboration in the construction and execution of policies in this area. 
In particular, the National Strategy for the Integration of Roma Communities recognizes the particular vulnerability of the Roma women and girls to multiple discriminations, establishing specific actions aimed for them, namely, their empowerment through the feminine mediation and establishment of associations. Likewise, the Migration Plan is attentive to the challenges of gender equality, defining measures that aim at the personal, professional and civic integration of the migrant women in Portuguese society. 
The Fifth National Plan for the Prevention and Fight against Domestic Violence 2014-2017 is the implementing instrument of the national public policies to combat all forms of gender-based violence, including domestic violence. There are five priority areas for action until the end of 2017, namely: i) prevention, awareness-raising and education; ii) protection of victims and promote their integration; iii) work with the perpetrators; iv) training and qualifications of professionals; and v) research and monitoring. Also, the new Strategy to Combat Domestic and Gender Violence reflects the challenge of localization and seeks to have national coverage, 33 reinforcing the national support network to victims of domestic and gender violence. The conclusion of protocols will ensure the definition of requirements and the articulation of competence between the various public and private actors involved, as well as the establishment of structures that respond to the needs of specific groups (LGBTI, victims of sexual violence, inter alia), always involving civil society. 
The Third National Action Programme against Female Genital Mutilation 2014-2017 is the implementing instrument of the national public policies towards the elimination of Female Genital Mutilation (FGM), including: prevention and awareness, integration and empowerment of women, education and empowerment of professionals and geo-referencing of the phenomenon. Alongside this mechanism: i) the state budget for 2017 provides for the exemption of court fees for the victims of female genital mutilation, slavery, trafficking, sexual coercion and rape; and ii) promotes training on FGM for members of the Children and Youth Protection Commissions, the Servi\0xC1o de Estrangeiros e Fronteiras (Immigration and Borders Service), students, professionals, healthcare professionals and police forces. It is proposed to take more definite action in risk communities, mobilizing non-governmental organizations and, in particular, the organizations of migrants, since Portugal is among the countries at risk, according to the World Health Organization.  
In this context, we point out the new format of awareness campaign, through the distribution of leaflets in the main national airports and airports in Bissau, Guinea Bissau, for passengers travelling to countries where this practice occurs and which will be repeated again this year. Also, at the 61th session of the Commission on the Status of Women (March 2017) UNFPA and UNICEF co-organized a high-level event on this subject with the support of Portugal. 
Also in terms of universal access to sexual and reproductive health and reproductive rights, we highlight the access to sexual education in public and private educational establishments and to family planning, including free access to a doctor, infertility treatments, decriminalization of abortion (including of voluntary abortion) and techniques of medically assisted procreation. These were recently extended to all women, regardless of diagnosis of infertility, marital status or sexual orientation. Also, we note the booklets on Education and Citizenship (for pre-school and 1 to 3 cycles) on the equality between women and men in education, formal and non-formal. 
The Third Action Plan to Combat Trafficking in Human Beings 2014-2017 is the implementing instrument of the national public policy aiming at the reinforcement of mechanisms of identification and protection of victims, the deepening of collaboration and articulation with public entities and concerned civil society organizations and the adaptation of the national response to the new challenges, namely the new forms of human trafficking and recruitment. The inter-institutional and international cooperation is relevant here, since this is a transnational phenomenon developed by organized criminal networks. In this context, it should be highlighted: i) the Network of Support and Protection of Victims of Trafficking, mechanism for cooperation and information sharing, prevention, protection and reintegration of victims of human trafficking; and ii) the Observatory on Trafficking in Human Beings, which monitors the occurrence of this form of crime at national level. 
In this context, the government has involved civil society in a committed way, in particular to combat genderbased violence and the fight against trafficking in human beings, in the definition and implementation of all awareness campaigns, support to awareness-raising and training, and recognizing projects developed in these areas. 
The instruments listed reflect the way Portugal has adopted and strengthened policies and legislation for the 34 promotion of gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls at all levels. However, Portugal faces the challenge of updating these instruments starting a new planning cycle of gender equality policies. It is intended that this cycle has a broader and integrated approach, promoting increased coordination of efforts at the same time it takes a more structuring effect and sustainable results. In this sense, an Equality Strategy is to be adopted, with a longer lifespan and with greater emphasis on the integration of gender equality into governance, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. 
 
The adoption of a national water policy is a priority task of the State, in economic and social terms, planning a rational management of water resources provided by the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic. A greater emphasis is placed in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19, with the objective to ensure accessibility and sustainability of the urban water cycle and water resources (territorial enhancement) and ensure the accessibility of water and energy (strengthening equality and social cohesion). 
                                                                                              35 The water and sanitation sector in Portugal, through the public water supply services and urban waste water treatment, has a crucial role in Portuguese society. The provision of water services is local and this has been one of the areas where local government has had an impact in recent decades. The coverage and quality of services experienced positive development during the past four decades, as a result of local and national initiatives, combining environmental policy instruments, with the important contribution of EU funding. With regard to regulation, the Regulatory Authority for Water and Waste Services, is the independent body with the task of regulating and overseeing of public water supply, urban waste water and urban waste management, including the coordination and supervision of the quality of water for human consumption. 
Portugal has adopted a clear public policy in the water and sanitation sector, translated into consistent and coherent legislation and integrated strategic plans. As far as legislation (in the field of universal and equitable access to safe drinking water) is concerned, the Law on Water (2005) that transposes the Water Framework Directive (2000) into Portuguese law, establishes the principle that water has a social value, enshrines universal access to water to meet basic human needs, at a socially acceptable cost, without discrimination or exclusion. This law was complemented in 2008 by the economic and financial system of water resources, with the progressive tariffs depending on the intensity of use of water, preserving access of households, considering their socio-economic situation. In addition, the anti-discrimination legal framework ensures access and fruition of goods and services which are available to the public without discrimination on any ground such as race, ethnic or national origin, gender or disability. 
Regarding strategic planning, it is currently in force, for the period 2014-2020, the Strategic Plan for Water Supply and Wastewater Treatment, as a follow-up to previous strategies laid down for the water and wastewater sectors, aiming to ensure the continuity, universality, quality and sustainability in the provision of these public services. This plan has set out 19 operational objectives for 2020 based on 5 areas, namely: i) environment protection and improvement of the quality of bodies of water; ii) enhancement of the quality of services provided; iii) efficient resource management optimization; iv) economic, financial and social sustainability; and v) basic and cross-cutting conditions. 
In this respect, it should be pointed out that the action of local authorities within the scope of their political powers, to contribute to the promotion and protection of the populationsi interests in ensuring the continuity, universality and quality of water supply and wastewater treatment. 
The investment made over the last few decades enabled the public sector of water and sanitation to make a remarkable progress. The sector now faces new challenges that require efficient resource management. 
For example, these are some of the results achieved in this sector. Currently, 96% of households are served by a public water supply system. In other cases, because they concern areas often isolated, it is not technically or economically viable to build public water supply systems and they are, therefore, normally served by individual solutions, using their own wells. In Portugal, the quality of drinking water is excellent, with a remarkable path in 20 years of safe water from 50% in 1993 to 99% in 2015. It should be noted that 99% of households are equipped with water facilities and 98% have a shower or bath. Furthermore, 83% of households are connected to the public sanitation system and the other cases are dealt with individual solutions such as septic tanks. 
Among the main challenges we face are: the application of the user pays principle, the sustainability and accessibility of these basic services, the specialization of its exploitation and management, for example by ensuring the supply of water to the population during a drought. 
In addition, the improved access to sanitation facilities and services by marginalized or vulnerable groups (such 36 as Roma communities, homeless people, populations without a fixed address, people with disabilities or living in residential areas without adequate infrastructure/facilities) still represents a challenge for Portugal. 
The national strategy for the integrated water resources management is materialized in the National Water Plan (NAP). This is a strategic instrument which sets out the main options of the national water policy and the principles and rules guiding such policy, to be implemented by the River Basin Management Plans and the Specific Water Management Plans. 
The NAP seeks to be comprehensive, yet pragmatic, framing policies for the management of national water resources, with a strategic vision for the management of water resources and based on the protection of resources and sustainability of the national social and economic development. 
Thus, water management should pursue three main objectives: the protection and enhancement of the status of aquatic and land ecosystems with regard to their water needs as well as the protection of wetlands directly depending on them; the promotion of sustainable, balanced and equitable use of good water, with the allocation of different types of uses, having regard to their economic value, based on the long-term protection of available water resources; and increasing resilience to floods and droughts and other extreme weather events due to climate change. 
Management of water implies cohesive and structured links with other sectorial policies, given their crosscutting nature. In 2012, Portugal launched the National Water Efficiency Plan 2020 focused on reducing water losses and optimizing water use as an essential management tool for the protection of water resources, particularly in a country where the climate variability often induces water stress. Our goal is to improve water efficiency by 2020 and 2030, limiting to 25% and 20% of total water losses in the water distribution network, respectively. The River Basin Management Plans for mainland Portugal 2016-2021 should be highlighted, given that the overall status of 53% of the surface water bodies has been classified as good or high. Regarding aquifers, 84% of them have achieved a good status during the second cycle evaluation. 
In risk prevention, mention should be made to the National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, the Resource Alert and Monitoring Programme and the National Information System on Water Resources which has a Monitoring and Alert Water Resources Subsystem for the management of risk situations (flooding and water pollution). 
In terms of regional commitments, the Portugal 2020, following the Europe 2020 Strategy, includes the purpose of investing in water resources, to meet the requirements of the EUis environmental acquis and to address needs identified investment, in particular to improving the quality of water bodies, within the thematic area of Sustainable and Efficient Use of Resources; and also to enhance and efficiently manage current resources and infrastructure, ensuring the quality of service provided to populations and the sustainability of urban water cycle systems. In this context, and as part of the third planning cycle provided by the Water Framework Directive, Portugal has been conducting studies to improve the assessment of the status of water bodies, using EU funding, for a better understanding of the most significant pollutants at the national level. 
In terms of international commitments, we wish to make reference to the Albufeira Convention (1998), a truly innovative instrument, not only to broaden the scope of the Portuguese-Spanish relations in the area of water, but also to extend the geographic scope to cover all areas included in the rivers that Portugal shares with Spain n Minho, Lima, Douro, Tejo and Guadiana n ensuring the Spanish-Portuguese cooperation in this field. The international basins represent 64% of mainland Portugal and 42% of mainland Spain, respectively. Except for 37 the last stretch of the Guadiana, the territory of Spain occupies the upper part of these five shared basins, which means that Portugal is downstream. It should be pointed out that this collaboration between the two countries extends to planning exercises provided for by the Water Framework Directive. For the current planning cycle (2016-2021), the two countries agreed to jointly draw up a new generation of River Basin Management Plans for the shared basins. 
It is in this reference framework that Portugal has been sharing its experience and knowledge in these matters with developing countries, supported by its own financial resources (or raised at international level) and involving public and private sectors as well as civil society. 
 
In the economic and social spheres, the Portuguese Constitution determines that the State has to adopt a national energy policy, with preservation of natural resources and ecological balance, promoting international cooperation in this field. This national priority is also reflected in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19, under the lead of the energy transition, in particular: i) Portugal as Europeis energy supplier; ii) promoting final energy consumption from renewable sources; iii) promoting the potential for cleaner and cheaper energy production; iv) stimulating energy competition and competitiveness; v) boosting energy efficiency; vi) 38 expanding electric mobility; and vii) developing the energy technology cluster. 
The National Reform Programme notes that Portugal has a territory with high potential, hence the need to promote a balanced and environmentally sustainable economic development through the rational use of its resources. On the other hand, Portugal is highly dependent on energy imported from third countries (78.3% in 2015), and tackling this challenge is important for the economic competitiveness and sustainability of the external imbalances. In this context, the strategy for deep economy-wide de-carbonization stands out by promoting sustainable mobility as well as sustainable smart cities which also drives a steady progress towards achieving energy independence from foreign energy sources, as well as better sector regulation and a more balanced territorial development by harnessing the potential of solar power in territories most lacking in economic growth. 
Portugal has a large and diverse potential of endogenous renewable resources and a focus on hydro, wind and solar sources is the result of an ambitious and successful plan to promote renewable energy, in line with the European level of ambition. As a result, demonstrating the national potential, in May 2016 Portugal registered 4 consecutive days of electricity consumption without using any fossil fuels. Within this framework, Portugal intends to put the renewable energy it produces on the European market competitively, thereby contributing to the security of supply, sustainability and compliance with EU climate and energy targets 
 In terms of regional commitments, and in the area of sustainable development, we underline the notable progress in national performance in implementing the Europe 2020 Strategy targets, in particular increasing the share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption and increasing energy efficiency by reducing the proportion in primary energy consumption. 
At the European level, the Energy Union Framework Strategy is based on five mutually supportive dimensions:
i) energy security, solidarity and trust; ii) a fully-integrated internal energy market; iii) energy efficiency as a contribution to the moderation of energy demand; iv) decarbonisation of the economy; and v) research, innovation and competitiveness. In line with these dimensions, Portugal promotes, in particular, the effective implementation of the electricity interconnection targets (10% in 2020 and 15% in 2030), the design of a fully integrated European market, the development of regional electricity markets, energy efficiency and the review of security measures in the electricity supply, to strengthen a resilient Energy Union. The investment in energy infrastructure, in particular in energy interconnections within the European Electricity Market, plays a key role in the security of supply, the promotion of integration in new energy markets and promoting cooperation between countries by enabling resource sharing. 
At regional level, the promotion of electrical interconnection with Spain has enabled the development of the Iberian Electricity Market and created conditions for the establishment of the Iberian Natural Gas Market, increasing the security of supply and making for more efficient management of the national electricity and gas systems, and a better balance in market prices. 
Within the framework of international cooperation, we highlight the participation in the International Energy Agency, the Union for the Mediterranean, the Energy Charter and the International Renewable Energy Agency, promoting at international level the affirmation of renewable energy, energy efficiency and security of supply, fostering partnerships and attracting investment. Companies and research units have also enabled the spread of technology and national experience in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency, at the global level. 
Also at the international level, it is important to make reference to i) the Memorandum of Understanding on 39 the Establishment of a High Level Group on Interconnections for South-West Europe, developed to ensure full implementation of the objectives contained in the Madrid Declaration (2015); ii) promoting a technical and financial viability study for the electrical interconnection between Portugal and Morocco for electricity trade, through an undersea cable between the two countries; iii) the Joint Declaration on the establishment of a Roadmap for Sustainable Electricity Trade between Morocco and the European Internal Energy Market between Germany, France, Spain and Portugal with a view to providing the conditions to make possible renewable electricity trade. 
Concerning cooperation with third countries, in the field of public energy policies, we would point out cooperation with: i) Cape Verde, the Protocol on Cooperation, including technical institutional capacity building in the field of fuels and electricity; ii) Mozambique, the Protocol on Cooperation covering the conventional energy, renewable energy and energy efficiency sectors, and its Action Plan; and iii) East Timor, the Memorandum of Understanding on energy, geology and mining. We would also support civil society actors, in particular Non-governmental development organizations (NGDOs), in the development of technologies and good practices, namely in Guinea-Bissau and S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe, with the aim of supporting people to take advantage of these new technologies. 
In this context, it should also be noted the: Cascais Declaration (2015) within the framework of the 2014-2024 Decade of Sustainable Energy for All in the CPLP countries, recognizing the importance of combining efforts towards the implementation of concrete actions which contribute to the sustainable development of energy resources and the consequent creation of wealth and well-being; the creation of the CPLP Energy Network, in supporting the establishment and promotion of national energy agencies, information sharing, strategy development, fundraising, promote the academia and training courses, private sector involvement and capacity building in public bodies in the field of renewable energy and energy efficiency. 
In line with the National Development and Energy Plans of the Member States, CPLP Strategic Vision and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and in order to define a new model of co-operation and strengthen cross-sector collaboration, the CPLP Strategic Plan for Energy Cooperation will be adopted in 2017, to achieve universal energy access, energy autonomy and sovereignty within the Comunidade dos Pa\0xCCses de L\0xCCngua Portuguesa (CPLP), prioritizing the most vulnerable populations. 
Portugal has the objective to increase, by 2020, 31% of the share of renewable energy in gross final energy consumption (28% in 2015) reflected in the National Renewable Energy Action Plan. In this sense, it is relevant to implement and promote policy measures that will significantly contribute to increase the renewable energy use on national territory, such as attracting solar and wind energy projects, the promotion of self-consumption, small-scale energy production and biomass, as well as measures to promote a circular economy, and in particular the positive externalities of waste management. 
For 2020, Portugal also aims to achieve the EUis target of 20% reduction in primary energy consumption, with the national target of 25% reduction in primary energy consumption and the specific target for the Public Administration of 30% reduction. This is framed within the National Energy Efficiency Action Plan and the Commitment to Green Growth. This plan identifies actions at national level, with a horizontal scope, in the field of transportation, residential and non-residential, industry, State, behavioural patterns and agriculture. 
Considering the current features of the national energy mix, the usage of alternative fuels in transport, 
including electricity in road transport, was considered to be of strategic importance to the objective of 
                                                                                              40 incorporating renewable energy into the sector as well as to the objective to de-carbonize it. In line with this view, with the Programme for electric mobility (2009), Portugal emerged as a pioneer in the adoption of new mobility models that are environmentally sustainable and capable of exploiting the relation with the electricity grid, to maximize the benefits of the energy from renewable sources. Nowadays, having concluded the review of the regulatory framework, attempts are made to expand the charging infrastructure and incentives to encourage the use of electric vehicles namely in public passenger transportation. 
Regarding the generation of oceanic, off-shore wind and wave renewable energy, the Industrial Strategy for Ocean Renewable Energy was created with a view to enable the conditions which value the marine energy resources, generate income and jobs in the steelwork applied to shipbuilding, scientific services, naval industry to support operations, technological sectors with significant export potential, promoting the creation of a cluster that maximizes several economic activities. 
Within the framework for research, development and innovation, projects are ongoing under the Horizon 2020 Programme in the field of energy efficiency in industry and in the field of geothermal energy. Moreover, the implementation of international groups within the framework of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan in the area of low-carbon technologies aimed at joint research and development for clean and cheaper technologies, namely: ocean energy, geothermal energy, solar power focused on solar thermal power concentration, energy efficiency in industry and buildings, energy systems, smart communities and intelligent solutions with focus on consumers, and bio-energy efficiency. 
At the level of decentralized energy production and adapting to the new challenges of distributed generation, the Unidades de Produ\0xC1\0x201Eo para Autoconsumo (UPAC) [Energy Generation Units for Self-Consumption] and the Unidades de Pequena Produ\0xC1\0x201Eo [Small-Scale Generation Units] ensure that the new energy generation facilities are sized to meet the local consumption needs thus enabling businesses and households, both individually and collectively, to generate, consume and sell (wholly or partially) their own electricity. The UPAC promotes greater awareness, in particular by low-voltage consumers, their consumption profile, inducing energy efficiency behaviour as well as contributing to the optimization of endogenous resources and technical benefits for the network, in particular by reducing network losses. 
The Energy Efficiency Programme in the Public Administration (2011) seeks to deliver by 2020 a 30% reduction in consumption in the Public Administration bodies and services, should not increase costs, but rather to combat the inefficiency and energy waste, promoting best practices as well as healthier and more sustainable patterns of behaviour, and stimulate energy services companies to meet those needs. 
The National Building Energy Performance Certification System has contributed to the increased emphasis on issues related to energy efficiency and use of renewable energy in the buildings. This system has evolved towards achieving the highest energy classes, not only for new buildings, but also in large scale rehabilitation of existing buildings. 
On the other hand, the Intensive Energy Consumption Management System applies to high energy-consuming facilities, with a view to increasing their energy efficiency and having regard to the need to safeguard its competitiveness in the global economy. It provides for high energy-consuming facilities to carry out regular energy audits, focusing on the conditions for using energy and promoting greater energy efficiency, including the use of renewable energy sources. Also, it provides for the development and implementation of Plans for the Rationalization of Energy Use covering minimum energy efficiency targets. 
                                                                                              41 The deepening of the liberalization of the electricity and natural gas markets requires the adoption of measures to ensure that all customers have access to these essential services, and in particular the economically vulnerable customers, regardless of their supplier. Measures have been taken recently for the automation of the allocation mechanism of the Social Energy Tariff (electricity and natural gas), which resulted in 800,000 families having benefited from this social support, in little over a year. 
In the context of access to sustainable energy sources, we would also highlight: i) the National Programme of Dams with High Hydropower Potential (2007), identifying the national hydroelectric potential untapped; and ii) the Development and Investment Plan for the Electricity Transmission Network, projects for the development of national electricity transmission network by 2022. 
Among the financial support for encouraging investment in electricity generation from renewable sources and improve energy efficiency, we point out at national level and within the scope of the Portugal 2020, the Operational Programme for Sustainability and Efficient Use of Resources and the Regional Operational Programmes; the Innovation Fund; the Energy Efficiency Fund; the Environmental Fund; and the National Fund for the Rehabilitation of Buildings. In the same context, it has also created two financial instruments, in the context of the Portugal 2020, namely the Financial Instrument for Energy, from the European Investment Bank, and the Financial Instrument for Urban Rehabilitation and Revitalization. It should be noted that the incentive and support schemes cover the entire national territory, but there are several other successful projects resulting from regional and local initiatives. 
 
 
 
The right of everyone to work is enshrined in the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic and it is up to the State to promote: i) the implementation of policies for full employment; ii) equal opportunities in the choice of occupation or type of work and conditions for not prohibiting or restricting access to work on grounds of gender; and iii) the workersi cultural awareness and technical training and professional improvement. There is in addition the right to live in a human, healthy and ecologically balanced environment, thus enshrining sustainable development as an eminent social value; and the right to education, structurally ensuring equality 42 and labour opportunities, as well as overcoming inequalities in the realization of economic, social and cultural rights. 
This dimension of action is of particular importance in the context of National Reform Programme. The priority goals of this strategy are to improve the qualifications of the adult population as well as employment growth, to reduce the labour market segmentation and improve the quality of industrial relations. To achieve these goals, the Government has introduced a number of measures which are also reflected in the priorities identified in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19 adopted by the current Constitutional Government. 
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is involved in the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 Strategy, promoting sustainable and inclusive growth, in order to achieve a 75% employment rate and reduce early school absenteeism rate to 10%, but also from the perspective of the Country-Specific Recommendations made to Portugal, in particular those related to the activation of the long-term unemployed and enhanced coordination among employment and social services, as well as the strengthening of incentives for permanent contracts. In this framework, we underline the contribution of environmental protection and the environmental footprint reduction towards European economic and social development, as well as the promotion of social, labour and political cohesion. On the other hand, the Capital Markets Union is a concrete example of how the Union aimed at overcoming the banking sector constraints to finance the real economy, and thus contribute to the strategy to stimulate growth and employment. 
From the many international commitments to reduce inequalities, it is important to make reference to : the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948); the UN Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial 
Discrimination (1963); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1965); the Declaration on Race and Racial Prejudice (1978); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979); the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988); the World Declaration on Education for All (1990); the Agenda 21 (1992); the revised European Social Charter of the Council of Europe (1996); the Kyoto Protocol (1997); the UN Security Council Resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (2000); the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (2000); the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2006); the Durban Declaration (2011); the Incheon Declaration (2015); and the Paris Agreement (2015). 
In particular, Portugal has ratified several International Labour Organization (ILO) conventions in order to promote, inter alia, better working conditions, workeris health and safety, equal pay, salary protection, and compensation for accidents at work. We would also emphasize the Global Jobs Pact (2009) guidance for the different national and international policies aimed at creating jobs, protecting workers and stimulating economic recovery in a crisis situation. 
With regard to cooperation with partner countries and contributing to inclusive and sustainable development, in respect for Human Rights, Portugal has signed several Memoranda of Co-operation in the field of employment and vocational training, inspection, protection and social security such as: i) cooperation agreements with Cape Verde and S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 e Pr\0xCCncipe in the field of economics and exchange with a view to promoting macroeconomic and financial stability in those countries, as well as fostering their economic and financial relations with Portugal and the European Union as a whole; or ii) through the implementation of the Action Plan for the Promotion of Equality and Equity in the Comunidade dos Pa\0xCCses de L\0xCCngua Portuguesa (CPLP) [Community Of Portuguese Speaking Countries], with the development of social cooperatives and economic development projects and the creation of CPLP women entrepreneur networks. 
43 

To reduce the number of young people not in education, employment or training (NEET), the National Plan to Implement Youth Guarantee (Plano Nacional de Implementa\0xC1\0x201Eo da Garantia Jovem, or PNI-GJ) was continued during 2016. In 2017 and in coming years, it is important to make efficiency operational gains in the institutional system associated to the Youth Guarantee, broadening and reinforcing the network of partner institutions, with an aim to improve capacity in the identification of Youth NEET. By operationalizing the strategies conceived and developed in the National Strategy for young people neither in education nor in employment (designed in collaboration with ILO and support of the EU), in the field of technical assistance, it should promote efficiency gains in the identification and enrolment of youth, by using more efficient configurations of partnerships, aiming at the target audience of youth NEET, as well as unemployed youth not registered in the Employment Public Service. At the same time, a more articulated relationship between the different school counselling subsystems, in the employment public service and in the Qualifica Centres will be promoted, ensuring all youth and adults have knowledge of the available offers.     
The valuation of training in learning results, in the scope of the double certification for young people, is also part of a comprehensive strategy for raising young peopleis qualifications and employability, with an emphasis on the training routes with a strong link to the labour market, in the context of high youth unemployment. Also with the aim of promoting and facilitating access to double certification qualification for youth and adults, we highlight the National Qualifications Catalogue (Cat\0xB7logo Nacional de Qualifica\0xC1\0x0131es, or CNQ) as an instrument of strategic management of non-academic qualifications. 
Aside of the effort to upgrade the qualifications of younger people, it is important to overcome the qualifications deficit among adults, in particular economically active and unemployed adults, the long-term and very long-term unemployed with low qualifications, promoting lifelong learning. The Qualifica Programme foresees the establishment of 300 centres for hosting, guiding and certify adults, spread over all the online devices (Qualifica Passport) and a call center, in conjunction with a broad offer of education and training of adults, with the aim of involving one million Portuguese people and to ensure that, by 2020, at least 50% of the adult population has completed secondary education and achieve the target set by the European Agenda for Adult Learning that by 2020, 15% of adults take part in lifelong learning activities and 25% by 2025. 
Within the strategy to improve the public employment service, we are seeking efficiency gains in the Balc\0x201Eo \0x2044nico do Emprego [One Stop Shop for Employment], namely in what concerns the activation of beneficiaries of unemployment social payments and the extension of the scope for a more intensive and personalized assistance for target groups, such as youth not in education, employment or training (NEET) and long-term unemployed persons, looking for work and vocational training, by improving: i) the online interface; ii) methodologies for contacting with citizens and businesses; and iii) the coordination with other public bodies. It should also be noted that setting up the Modelo de Acompanhamento Personalizado para o Emprego [Model for Personalized Coaching towards Employment], which refocuses the intervention of the public employment service on capacity building for unemployed, help them in their return to work, tailored to their individual needs. 
The reorientation of active labour market policies, initiated in 2016, aims to enhance the creation of effective, qualified and sustainable jobs. In particular, the measure Contrato-Emprego [Contract-Employment] (2017) supports job creation by providing employers with financial support to conclude an employment contract (mainly open-ended contracts) with registered unemployed persons, with positive differentiation in job creation in areas and recipients with the greatest need for support. The measure Contrato-Gera\0xC1\0x201Eo [ContractGeneration] promotes the activation of young unemployed people and the long-term unemployed, especially older workers, including: i) a combination of partial reforms and support for hiring young people; and ii) 44 support for companies that hire both young people who are either unemployed or looking for their first job and long-term unemployed. For professional traineeships, the creation of the Pr\0xC8mio-Emprego [EmploymentAward] supports the transition from traineeship contracts to open-ended contracts, promoting better employability levels of traineeships. 
The strategic axels of intervention in the Portuguese labour market aim to reduce segmentation and tackle precariousness, besides improving the qualification levels of the population. In this sense, the integrated and shared assessment (2017) of the employment system with a view to concluding a social dialogue agreement that contains measures to reduce labour market segmentation (e.g. limitation on fixed-term contracts; and differentiation between open-ended and fixed-term contract contributory schemes) and a boost to the collective social agreement. Portugal also suggests further monitoring of compliance with employment rules, as it is a key criterion for improving the detection and correction of situations of under-declared or undeclared work, and the improvement of mechanisms to combat improper use of the service agreement, namely by extending to other forms of undeclared work (e.g. traineeships). Regarding the fight against segmentation and precariousness within the State itself, we point out the Special Programme to Regularize Precarious Employment Forms in the Public Administration (2017). It should also be highlighted the sustained growth in the Guaranteed Monthly Minimum Wage. 
One of the goals of the National Strategy for Health and Safety at Work 2020 is to promote safe and secure working environments for all workers. The Strategy is based on three objectives: i) promote the quality of working life and business competitiveness; ii) reduce the number of work-related accidents by 30% and the incidence rate for work-related accidents by 30%; and iii) reduce the occupational risk factors. In addition, reference should be made to the National Campaign against Undeclared Work, as well as the fight against illegal employment and forced labour resorting to illegal migration and trafficking in human beings. 
The Digital Competence National Initiative e.2030 aims to rank Portugal among the top European countries in digital skills by 2030 and simultaneously overcome the information technology and communication skills shortage, focusing on: i) ensuring the digital inclusion for the full exercise of citizenship; ii) promotion of employability conditions in a context of growing demand for digital skills, through the Strategy and Action Plan 2015-2020 for Digital Employability; iii) encouraging specialization in digital technologies and applications for the qualification of employment and the creation of a higher value-added economy; and iv) producing new knowledge in the frontier of science and digital technology, in international cooperation. 
In the field of business creation and self-employment, the Programme Start-Up Portugal seeks to launch a coherent ecosystem that encourages the emergence of start-ups and speeding up their growth. The Programa Capacitar (Capacity Building Programme) invests in the innovation and improvement of management skills by strengthening the roles of the Technology Interface Centres, extending the intervention skills in business, supporting new products, promoting the knowledge transfer, and to support new processes such as digitization. Finally, the Programa Capitalizar (Capitalization Programme) supports the capitalization of businesses and the rebound in investment, through: i) administrative simplification and systemic framework; ii) taxation; iii) corporate restructuring; iv) financial leverage and gearing and investment; and v) boosting of the capital market. In particular, we note the better access to finance for micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, especially for innovative businesses and start-ups. Both private and public sector have hired several credit lines for that purpose at the European Investment Bank (nearly EUR 1.1 billion in 2016). 
The public acknowledgement of the economic dimension of culture has demonstrated the sector's potential for 45 employment and economic development, as well as their importance as a factor to fight social asymmetries, including support for research and scientific dissemination, and the creation of support structures for entrepreneurship to promoters of cultural projects, cultural and creative industries, the revitalization and work qualification of local craftsmen, as well as the creation of start-ups in the cinematographic and audiovisual sector. 
With respect to the fight against all forms of discrimination at work, it is important to highlight, in the context of the social dialogue, the Agenda para a Igualdade no Mercado de Trabalho e nas Empresas (Agenda for Gender Equality in the Labour Market and Businesses), strategically focusing on the gender pay gap, through the adoption of mechanisms that fight for a system for transparency in salary; the occupational segregation; parenthood; conciliation of personal, family and professional life; and equal representation of women and men in decision-making positions, by encouraging the coresponsibility and interaction with businesses. In particular, and to promote women participation in key decision making jobs, the Parliament is currently discussing a proposal for a bill on establishing a regime of balanced gender representation in the Administration and entitites form the public corporate sector, and also in publicly traded companies, proposing a minimal percentage of 33% of the less represented gender in a given entity, starting in 2017. Several proposals are being prepared to effectively implement the constitutional principle of \0xECequal pay for equal work and promote the fight to inequalities in salary between women and men in the labour market, through the adoption of mechanisms that privilege transparency in salary payments.  
In addition, the legal system offers protection against any discrimination in access and conditions of work and, in particular, the efforts to integrate the migrant population, including refugees, into the labour market, through specific employment and entrepreneurship programmes. Moreover, the disadvantaged situation of Roma communities requires specific measures to further promote their better integration and capacity building, be it through the Qualifica Centres or through employability support. The Programa de Emprego e Apoio \0x2021 Qualifica\0xC1\0x201Eo das Pessoas com Defici\0xCDncia e Incapacidade (Employment and Qualification Support Programme for Persons with Disabilities or Incapacity), also helps this target group in relation to access, maintenance, and progression in employment, while creating the Marca Entidade Empregadora Inclusiva (Inclusive Employer Quality Mark) in order to raise public awareness of the issues concerning people with disabilities or incapacity. 
The main challenges facing Portugal concern the fight against precariousness, and a close dialogue has been engaged with social partners to find solutions, particularly in: i) combating the illegal use of fixed-term contracts, promoting, on the contrary, active employment policies that focus on more permanent and sustainable integration into the labour market; and ii) combat gender pay inequality in the labour market in relation to the structural constraints that disadvantage women, based on entrenched stereotypes and unbalanced relations of power, which require a systemic and multidimensional approach and response. 
 
 
 
Economic growth, social development and climate change adaptation and mitigation depend to a large extent on investment in infrastructure, sustainable industry and technological progress. Portugal is committed to address these challenges, by presenting strategies that have been developed and programmes that seek to support and develop the infrastructure, industry and innovation and mobilize a range of resources, both public and private. 
                                                                                              47 The National Reform Programme aims to create a dynamic for balanced economic growth and social cohesion that are mutually reinforcing, without prejudice to the consolidation of public finances and its medium-term strategy for the development of the Portuguese economy in the national reform programme. Based on the identification of structural blockages characterizing the Portuguese economy, this strategy is organized around six pillars, which multiply in areas of action and concrete measures to implement a new agenda for growth and economic and social development. In this context, three pillars stand out: innovation of the economy, capitalization of businesses and territorial development. 
Portugal still faces some constraints with regard to innovation in the business sector and territorial disparities, and it is essential to invest in Research, Development and Innovation in the territory in order to promote balanced development, the reduction of costs and the strengthening of social cohesion, sustainability and rational use of resources. 
With regard to infrastructure, investment in recent decades has transformed mobility in Portugal, from a situation where low levels of transport infrastructure were one of the key barriers to economic development and well-being, to a current framework within which the national transport infrastructure network is recognized as one of the most important added values for the promotion of development in the entire territory of the country, through: i) the de-carbonization of the economy; ii) sustainable mobility and urban policies; iii) the efficiency in the use of resources by applying the circular economy to all sectors of activity; iv) territorial cohesion; v) the use of rail transport infrastructure; vi) the development of the maritime economy; and vii) resources distinctive territories. 
In regional terms, Portugal is committed with the objectives of the Europe 2020 Strategy, in particular in relation to the promotion of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth. In this context, we highlight: i) the European Structural and Investment Funds \0xF3 covering investment in infrastructure, energy, research and innovation, and direct and indirect financing of small and medium-sized enterprises; ii) the Investment Plan for Europe, which covers strategic investments in key areas such as infrastructure, energy, research, innovation and risk finance for small and medium-sized enterprises; iii) the Connecting Europe Facility, to finance resilient infrastructure networks in the sectors of transport, telecommunications and energy; and iv) the Horizon 2020, which funds research and innovation for virtually all SDG. 
In terms of international commitments, we point out the national involvement in several initiatives, with a particular focus on the \0xECSmart Harbours, which aims to promote discussion among CPLP countries on the strategic importance of access to the sea and the benefits of technology for improving sustainability and efficiency of ports. 
In the context of advancement of the inland, and promoting territorial cohesion and integration with the TransEuropean Transport Network as structural dimensions for the planning of the transport sector, the 2014-2020 Strategic Transport and Infrastructure Plan (PETI 3+) contains a set of investments in transport infrastructure to be in place by 2020 and is based on three strategic objectives: i) promote social and territorial cohesion, ensuring mobility and accessibility for people and goods throughout the country and environmental sustainability; ii) contribute to economic growth by supporting businesses and job creation; and iii) ensure the competitiveness of the transport sector and its financial sustainability. 
However, the operational framework of PETI 3+ was based on a wide range of projects with low selectivity and prioritization and without identifying sources of financing that would allow its implementation, that now the 48 Investment Plan Iron 2020 complements. Investment priorities have been repositioned in order to ensure value for money and the effective implementation of the projects and their financial allocations (2 billion euro), fostering the strengthening of internal and international connectivity (at the national and Iberian scales), competitiveness, the induction of private investment and job creation. The implementation of these investments is a financial package composed of European funds, the \0xECConnecting Europe Facility and the Portugal 2020, complemented by resources from the State budget and, potentially, the contribution of the Investment Plan for Europe. In 2016, there have been major developments in the 3 corridors of the 2020 Rail Investment Plan, in particular in the International South Corridor, the International North Corridor and in the North-South Corridor, which led to the procurement of about 25 million euro in studies and projects and the attribution of contracts with a total value of 97.5 million euro. 
In the field of roadway and highway transportation, it should be noted that the investments made in the last 30 years have made it possible to develop a national network of high-quality infrastructure, which has facilitated territorial cohesion and mobility of production factors, supplemented in 2017 with a planned road access for business areas in order to improve circulation to new poles of economic development. 
On the other hand, the Strategy for Increasing Port Competitiveness 2016-2026 will create 12,000 new jobs by 2030 and aims to: i) adapting infrastructure and equipment to increase the size of vessels and demands and hinterland connections; ii) improving the operation of port facilities; and iii) building of technological platforms in ports acceleration and new skills. It involves 8 ports in mainland Portugal, representing a total investment of 
2.1 billion euro. 
Moreover, we point out the exponential development of air transport of passengers, with an increase of 6 million passengers in all national airports, between 2013 and 2016, and the development of airport infrastructure with investments of around 200 million euro. 
Also, out of the National Reform Programme the following projects stand out: i) expansion and requalification of the national irrigation network; ii) the expansion of the subway networks in Lisbon and Oporto, in parallel with the introduction of a new model of organization and management of transportation in this field; iii) creation of conditions for the production of ocean renewable energies, such as offshore wind power and wave power, through the development of the Industrial Strategy for Oceanic Energies; and iv) the development of a program of private investment for the extension of digital networks and the reinforcement of access to last generation broadband and mobile networks (4G), as a means to promote a full and efficient digital inclusion of the population and businesses.  
In the areas of industrialization and innovation, key drivers of economic growth and job creation, Portugal is strongly committed to promote technological capabilities in the industrial sector, investing in knowledge to the successful development of science and technology and promoting the potential of new entrepreneurs and start-ups. One of the constraints on the competitiveness of the Portuguese economy continues to be related to its low R&D intensity and human resources qualification, leading to insufficient production capacity and transfer of scientific and technological knowledge, with negative consequences in the level of business innovation and therefore growth potential of the product. Research, Development and Innovation are thus instrumental in the creation of value and in the potential growth of GDP, so we propose to give a fresh impetus to the public policies through strong investment in knowledge transfer from higher education institutions to businesses, and in capacity-building and adjustment of the Portuguese corporate sector. 
                                                                                              49 Of particular relevance are the Programme Interface and Industry 4.0, fostering the link between scientific and technological knowledge and industrial production, together with the National Initiative E-Skills \0xF3 InCode.2030, intended to position Portugal in the leading European countries trained in digital skills. While the Interface will strengthen co-operation between academia and businesses, in order to enable Portugal to capitalize the potential of knowledge in order to create economic value, the Industry 4.0 initiative aims at three core objectives: i) accelerating take-up of technologies and concepts of Industry 4.0 in the Portuguese business fabric; ii) promote Portuguese technology, at international level; and iii) making Portugal a hub attractive for investment in industry 4.0. 
There are also a set of programmes and plans to renew and strengthen industrialization, through support for the creation and development of enterprises, making the Portuguese economy more competitive, including: i) the National Strategy for Entrepreneurship, implemented by the Start-Up Programme which seeks to boost start-ups and an ecosystem to encourage start-ups and accelerate their growth; and ii) the Seed Programme, which seeks to encourage the use of alternative financing instruments either through direct application of investors in the capital of companies, either by providing business with an alternative ways of raising funds other than resorting to credit, allowing a better and greater sharing of risk management. 
In a context of some instability in the international financial system, Portuguese companies have faced, in the last years, strong restrictions in access to credit, and this has been hampering their economic activities, particularly in SMEs. A Task Force for the Capitalization of Companies was created to put in place, in 2016, the Programa Capitalizar.  
In addition, and in order to promote more sustainable behaviour from an environmental point of view, the government launched the National Strategy for Environmentally Responsible Public Purchasing 2020 as a complementary instrument of environmental policies to reduce pollution, consumption of natural resources and increased efficiency of the systems. To this end, it shall include environmental criteria in public procurement in order to reflect the role of public procurement in achieving the objectives of sustainability. 
In the context of the Portugal 2020, support through financial instruments geared towards improving financing conditions of business investments, urban regeneration and energy efficiency, innovation and social entrepreneurship, is also foreseen. The aim is to diversify funding capabilities and to maximize complementarity of public financial resources in order to leverage investments and create conditions for improving the competitiveness of firms and other actors. We would draw attention to the establishment of the Development Financial Institution which should develop a portfolio of financial instruments supporting business development cycles, through debt and guarantees, venture capital and quasi-equity. 
Within the framework of the measures to stimulate investment there is also the establishment of the Investment Plan for Europe, one of the priorities of the current European Commission. One of its purposes is to give the real economy financing conditions, especially to overcome market failures. 
It should also be highlighted that the 2016-2020 \0xB4Commitment with Knowledge and Science: a commitment with the Future\0xAA Agenda and the policy on internationalization of higher education, science and technology aims to enhance scientific research and its internationalization as well as to foster innovation. 
Regarding the progressive upgrade of infrastructure and retrofit of industries to make them sustainable, with 
increased efficiency in resource use and greater adoption of clean and environmentally sound technologies and 
                                                                                              50 industrial processes, Portugal is also committed to meet the targets set under the Europe 2020 Strategy. A contribution of approximately 110 million euro from the Portugal 2020 for companiesi energy efficiency scheme is foreseen. 
Based on European Community legislation that has been transposed into Portuguese law, in view of fighting climate change by reducing carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions, the EU ETS Directive establishing a scheme for greenhouse gas emission trading within the Community is in force. To that end, funding mechanisms are available in order to enable industrial economic operators to invest in cleaner technologies that use fewer resources, such as the Fund NER 300 which is in force until 2020. During the Phase IV of the ETS, which will run from 2021 to 2030, the Innovation Fund - still under negotiation - will be made available. Its priority will be to offer financial incentives that allow economic operators to invest in environmentally sound and climatically sustainable production processes. 
In the context of possible support for infrastructure modernization / retrofit of industries to make them sustainable, it is important to mention the Environment Fund. It was created in 2017 to set out the strategic guidelines and determine the annual plan for aid allocation and use of revenue. It represents a further opportunity for financing environment projects presented by various public and private bodies. The type of support \0xECWaste and Circular Economy has significant potential to reduce primary raw materials, thus releasing resources for corporate development. 
The main challenges in achieving the targets set for the area of infrastructure are, on the one hand, the decarbonization of the economy, namely the adjustment of transport infrastructure to a new sustainable and shared mobility paradigm, ensuring equal access and addressing the specific needs of those using them (e.g. women, older people, persons with reduced mobility), by promoting their participation in the decision-making process; and on the other hand, funding and availability of the resources associated with high levels of indebtedness across the economy, thereby limiting the capacity to invest. Hence, in 2017 we will begin to develop the National Mobility Plan for the period 2020-2030 whose main purpose is to establish a strategy to develop and adapt transport systems and infrastructure with a view to facing technological, social and environmental trends and uncertainties that may affect patterns of mobility during the period of the plan. Despite using a holistic approach and being part of the European and global transport chains and networks, it pays particular attention to national rail mobility. 
In the field of industrialization and innovation, the challenges that have to be highlighted are intrinsically linked to structural blockages which have affected the evolution of the Portuguese economy, with a relevant impact on competitiveness, economic growth and social cohesion. The qualification levels of the Portuguese population, gender segregation in education, horizontal as well as vertical occupational gender segregation, levels of innovation in the companies, territorial disparities, public sector debt and corporate sector debt, social and economic inequalities are constraints that Portugal is committed to overcome through reform policy. The investments made in enhancing qualification, comprising, inter alia, digital skills, enabled Portugal to start forging a positive path that was interrupted during the crisis period. The strategies that are being implemented and those for the coming years are aimed at recovery and putting the country back on an upward path. The additional investment in research and development, accompanied by a larger knowledge transfer and resource mobility between academia and industry, the renewal and improvement of management capability, will enable companies and institutions to integrate into international value chains. 
 
The Constitution allows for rules and principles of international law to be integrated in Portuguese law. The principle of equality provides that all citizens have the same social dignity and equality before the law, and that no one shall be privileged or prejudiced by reason of ancestry, sex, race, language, territory of origin, religion, political or ideological beliefs, education, economic situation or sexual orientation, social status. From this principle, the promotion of social and legal equality and the guarantee of universal access to health have been constitutionally accepted to be the Stateis core tasks, as a way to ensure equal opportunities, overcome 52 economic, social, and cultural inequalities, personal development and a spirit of tolerance and mutual understanding, solidarity and social responsibility and democratic participation in collective life. These tasks are reflected in the National Reform Programme, the Portugal 2020 and in the Major Planning Options for 201619 adopted by the current Government.  
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is involved in the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 Strategy, in particular regarding the objective of promoting inclusive growth. In fact, cohesion and social integration are pillars of the Strategy, and it is perceived that the promotion of equality, social and labour policy is key to the economic and social development of the European Union. In this context it is relevant to mention the correlation with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and the European Convention of Human Rights. 
Of the many international commitments on reduction of inequalities, reference must be made to: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) and the UN Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1963), the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (1965); the Declaration on the breed and prejudices Race (1978); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (1979), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1988), the World Declaration on Education for All (1990), Agenda 21 (1992), the UN Security Council resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (2000); the Durban Declaration (2011); and the \0xEBIncheon Declaration (2015) and several Conventions of the International Labour Organization. 
With regard to cooperation with partner countries, the Portuguese cooperation policy reflects the intention of participating in the development of third countries, for the respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law. Portugal aims at supporting the PALOP [African Portuguese Speaking Countries] e East Timor, through the promotion of social protection, social inclusion and employment. Such aid has to support: i) the preparation and implementation of Strategic Cooperation Programmes, comprised of their respective Sectorial Cooperation Budgets; ii) strengthening institutional capacity, improving legislation, drafting of guidance documents for public policies and training; and iii) supporting programmes and projects aimed at poverty eradication. In international cooperation fora, Portugal assumes as a prerogative for the sustainable development of partner countries their ownership and leadership over their development processes, which also implies a more active role by these countries in international discussions and in the definition of policies and practices of international cooperation. 
At the same time, we point out the Project ACTION/Portugal 2015-2018, created with the aim of contributing to raise the coverage of social protection systems, through: i) support in the design, implementation and evaluation of social protection programmes for the implementation of National Social Protection Levels; ii) capacity building and competences for the implementation of comprehensive and integrated systems of social protection by means of training and capacity building activities; iii) enhancing access of PALOP and Timor-Leste to information and resources to support the implementation or extension of social protection, available at regional and international level; and iv) contributing to the exchange of knowledge on innovation and good practices adopted in the context of the CPLP, regarding implementation /reinforcement of the Social Protection Levels. 
Portugal is one of the OECD countries with the highest income inequality rates, inter alia, with a significant proportion of working poor and several challenges relating to the difference in education, training and 53 qualification levels of the Portuguese people. All these elements limit the potential and competitiveness of the economy and disparities in the distribution of income in the labour market. The guaranteed monthly minimum wage constitutes a reference for the competitiveness and sustainability of enterprises, decent work and social cohesion, and is an essential means of combating poverty and achieving an adequate income. In this sense, the Government has taken the commitment to propose, in the context of social dialogue, an upgrade of the reference indicator (600 euro in 2019), in the framework of the strategy of containment of intense emigration flows recorded in recent years and the loss of human capital. It should be noted that the percentage of women receiving the payment is almost twice as menis, and the valuation of the payment contributes to the reduction of gender pay gap, without prejudice to the structural approach adopted by Portugal in combating discrimination in the labour market, including the Agenda for Equality in Labour Market and in the pay gap, occupational segregation, parenthood, conciliation and access to decision-making positions. 
On the recovery of social minima, the pension increase was obtained through the update of the rules for calculating the payments (2016). With the State Budget Law 2017, a compensatory increase in value of pensions covered invalidity and old-age pensions, retirement and the reform of the social protection system. Support mechanisms were recovered to guarantee the minimum social standards for citizens in greater vulnerability, such as the Rendimento Social de Inser\0xC1\0x201Eo (Social Integration Income) and the Complemento Solid\0xB7rio para Idosos (Senior Citizens Pension Supplement) and measures are being developed to strengthen their progressive social and labour inclusion, thus combating poverty. Regarding the fight against poverty in children and youth, the amounts of allowances were updated (2016), and there was an increase of the multiplying factor for single parent families in the Family Allowance scheme. 
Persons with disabilities are among the groups most discriminated and socially excluded.  To combat this circumstance, we point out as the main priority of the Major Plan Options 2017 the reinforcement of equality, social cohesion and inclusion of citizens with disabilities. Of the different measures in this field, we highlight the new Support Model for Independent Living for persons with disabilities, a pilot project which intends to use the \0xEBPersonal Assistancei model, to assist them in the performance of their daily living and social participation, with the implementation of pilot-projects for the period 2017-2020. The evaluation of these projects will enable the definition of a Personal Assistance Policy in Portugal. Also, the Inclusion Counter, a specialized department where detailed information in several areas of relevance to the field of disability will be made available, in an integrated manner. To better promote inclusion, the mandatory priority attendance was extended to call for all public and private entities providing public access for people with disabilities or impairments, elderly, pregnant women or people accompanied by babies. 
In the context of the reinforcement of the policies and learning instruments and qualification throughout life, particular attention has been given to young people, given the high levels of school failure which increase the risk of youth unemployment, NEET rates and generate pressure to emigrate. In this context, attention should also be drawn to the National Implementation Plan for a Youth Guarantee, a plan developed with the International Labour Organization and with the support of the European Commission which would improve the efficiency of reporting mechanisms and attracting young people. In addition, there are a number of programmes and initiatives, such as: i) the programme Incentivo ao Desenvolvimento Associativo, that allows for the development of work placements of young people in youth organizations; ii) the programme Empreende J\0xB7 \0xF3 Network of Perceptions and Business Management, to stimulate an entrepreneurial culture by supporting projects of young entrepreneurs who create jobs for young people; iii) the national project Youthpass which allows for the recognition and validation of skills acquired through non-formal education; iv) 54 the creation of the profile of Technical Youth, a professional that should reach the most disadvantaged young people and mobilize them for more fulfilled education courses. 
It is also worth mentioning the National Programme of Sport for All that aims to support projects that promote the full development of the individual, through a formal or informal practice of sports, with positive impacts on social inclusion, the integration of people with disabilities and to the promotion of gender equality, among other areas relevant to the full development of the individual and society. 
In addition to the improvement of the skills levels of the population, reducing segmentation and the fight against precariousness are strategic areas of intervention in the labour market and critical factors for improved equality and social cohesion. In this sense, a re-orientation of active labour market policies was done by improving the mechanisms of selectivity and proportionality of the measures and strengthening their role in creating effective and sustainable employment. In the same vein, the government and the social partners are committed to an integrated assessment and shared work throughout 2017 with a view to the conclusion of a conciliation agreement, with subsequent measures to reduce segmentation of the labour market (e.g. limitation of the system of fixed term contracts; differentiation of the contributory scheme applicable to permanent and temporary contracts) and of the reinforcement of social agreements. Strengthening the enforcement of labour standards is also a part of this strategy that is crucial to improve detection and correction of undeclared work or understated. Also in this context, the government will upgrade the law by establishing mechanisms to fight against the improper use of the service contract. It should also be noted that implementation of an Extraordinary Programme of Regularization of Precarious Links in Public Administration started last April 2017. 
Finally, the new Social Payment for Inclusion will reshape the social benefits in the field of disability, promoting the improvement of social protection, combating poverty and the full participation of people with disabilities in the labour market, already in 2017. At a later stage, due to start in 2019, the measure will extend social protection to children and youth. 
The measures being taken are reflected in the organization and functioning of public, private and education sectors. Regarding the fight against racial, ethnic or national discrimination, we point out the measures set out in the Strategic Plan for Migration for 2015-2020, such as: i) the development of initiatives for preventing and combating racism and racial discrimination; ii) the revision of the current legislative framework relating to the infringements by acts of discrimination on the grounds of nationality or ethnic origin; and iii) raising awareness of the role of the media in migration, cultural, religious and racial discrimination. However, it should be fundamentally recognized that discriminations are not watertight but multi-dimensional. It is therefore necessary to deepen the knowledge and identify appropriate responses to multiple discriminations, identifying the specific needs of groups which are at the intersection of various forms of discrimination, as well as the situation of Roma women and girls, in Portugal and in Europe. 
Portugal has a long migration history, and a strong political consensus on the benefits of migration, which in turn translates into cross cutting, inter-ministerial successful and monitored migration and integration policies - indeed, the Portuguese High Commission for Migration won the Best-Practices in Public Administration 2011 of the European Institute of Public Administration and the \0xECChoices programme received the biennial Youth Justice Without Borders 2014. The Strategic Plan for Migration for 2015-2020 seeks to align national policy on the country to a new, complex and challenging migration reality while addressing issues such as combating the demographic deficit, consolidating the integration and empowerment of communities living in Portugal, the inclusion and empowerment of new nationals, international mobility, enhancement of the attractiveness of the 55 country and the linkage between immigration and emigration, as well as support for the return and reintegration of emigrants. There is also strong political and social consensus for the reception and integration of refugees in Portugal. In that regard, it should be noted that Portugal ranks in 1st place in the 7th edition of the European Social Survey, in the reception of this target group in Portuguese society, as shown by numerous consortia that integrate local responses for NGOs and municipalities, in 91 of the 308 districts of Portugal. 
Culture is perceived as a tool to combat exclusion and discrimination, and has been developing the Mostra de Autores Desconhecidos (Exhibit of Unknown Authors), uniting the need to promote the concepts associated with the Copyright and Related Rights, and the perception of artistic creation and of the concept of works by artists, with social integration and empowerment of artists from disadvantaged social backgrounds. 
As a means of reducing disparities in the access to cultural assets and fostering cohesion, the Portuguese Film in Motion takes movies to the villages and towns where the population do not have regular access to cinema, contributing to the implementation of cultural policies that improve access to culture, in particular linking the different collections with school curricula, education and multiculturalism, essentially supported by mechanisms for non-formal education. 
The citizenship and participation of young people is a central aspect of public policies that boost demand, in qualitative and quantitative terms, i.e. increasing participation, but also reducing inequality in access to rights for full social inclusion: the programmes and projects involving leisure activities for young people, youth volunteering, knowledge and experience of democratic institutions, in addition to the focus on young people, generally allow access to youth who usually do not have the same economic and social opportunities, such as Youth Parliament, the Euroschool, the Programme for Occupation of Free Time, Holiday on the Move, the Programme Without Borders, the Agora N\0xDBs (Us Now, youth volunteering), or the International Work Camps. 
Ensuring equal opportunities for all is the universal health coverage, through the National Health Service, particularly in the national vaccination programme, created in 1965 and that now protects against 13 diseases. Although the National Health Service has been improved in terms of access, efficiency, equity, financial protection, transparency and shared management practices, it is necessary to reinforce the information in real time. To this end, it is developing an information system to support the operational planning for consolidating and centralizing information relating i) to the need of health and ii) the capacity installed. 
Aiming at guaranteeing the reduction of inequalities, one of the priority objectives is the advancement of the inland areas as a core aspect of the territorial cohesion and economic development through the National Programme for Territorial Cohesion and the Agenda for Inland including, in particular, incentive systems, inter alia, through the definition of a more favourable tax framework that stimulates and gives incentives for job creation and reducing context costs. 
Specific arrangements are also modified to promote independent living of people with disabilities, reducing taxes for labour and creating an incentive to firms to provide vehicles in their fleet adapted to people with disabilities. 
In this context, increasing difficulties in the combat against discrimination stand as major challenges and, at the global level, there are visible signs of regression and a trend for denying, or making it irrelevant, with regard to the various factors of discrimination. At the same time, forms of discrimination are becoming increasingly 
difficult to identify, and it is necessary to recognize inequalities and discrimination as violations of human rights 
                                                                                              56 which prevent the full realization of human dignity, promoting their elimination as a condition for progress and 	sustainable development. 
In this context, the refugee crisis poses a challenge to the international community and to Portugal. Portuguese public policies coordinated by the Servi\0xC1o de Estrangeiros e Fronteiras (Imigration and Borders Service) and the High Commissioner for Migration, in the area of reception and integration of migrants, enjoy experience, resources, political and civil solidarity and consensus. Given the diversity of host entities and the high number of refugees relocated, a Manual of Procedures was defined that stabilizes the Kit for Reception, delivered upon arrival. Still in relation to their integration, we point out the establishment of magazine REFUGEES, the campaigns for schools \0xECNot Just Numbers and \0xECE se fosse eu? (What if it was me?), language training programmes such as Portuguese for All, the Speak Programme and the Portuguese Online Platform, available in English and Arabic, to meet the current needs of refugees in Portugal. 

 
The right to adequate housing, constitutionally enshrined, is recognized as the basis for a stable and cohesive society and also as the foundation for access to other rights, such as education, health and employment. The Government recognizes, in the context of its political priorities, the role of urban areas as centres of potential social, economic and cultural dynamism. As such, the emphasis put on urban regeneration \0xF3 by defining the New Generation of Housing Policies \0xF3 is having growing importance in the National Reform Programme and in the Portugal 2020, and also in the Major Planning Options for 2016-19. The Constitution of the Portuguese 57 Republic tasks the State with programming and implementing policy supporting housing urbanization plans that ensure access to an adequate network of transport, as these are guarantees of equal access to employment, education and other services. 
It is for the State to ensure the prevention, identification and planning of protection and rescue of people in situations of natural or manmade disasters. To this end, Portugal has a National Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, an Integrated System for the Protection and Rescue Operations and properly carried out National Risk Assessments under the competence of the National Authority for Civil Protection. It is also worth noting the existence at the national level of instruments for disaster risk reduction and resilience, namely Emergency Civil Protection Plans at the various territorial levels, of a general or particular scope, the National Strategy for Preventive Civil Protection and the National Platform for Disaster Risk Reduction (set up in 2010, officially recognized by the UN in April 2011), with a view to fostering the principles of disaster risk reduction and building resilience of communities. 
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal remains committed with the Europe 2020 Strategy. The rights to housing, basic services and transport systems that are safe, accessible and sustainable are reflected in the European objectives of inclusive and Sustainable growth, since complementarity in access to these rights will allow to combat isolation, and promote inclusion and preservation of the environment. In 2016, Portugal supported the adoption of the Pact of Amsterdam, in pursuit of the polycentric development of the European area and the potential of urban areas, establishing that towns and cities should be better involved in European legislation, in the access to finance and knowledge sharing. 
Action under this field will require that Portugal complies with main international commitments, particularly the Agenda 21 (1992), the Kyoto Protocol (1997), the Paris Agreement (2015) and the UNESCO Convention for the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage (1972) and the other technical guidelines, manuals and recommendations of UNESCO. Reference should also be made to the integration of Portugal in the Learning Cities Network of UNESCO, being the second country in the region of Europe and America with the highest number of cities evaluated (8 in total).  
With the adoption of the New Urban Agenda of the United Nations, we also intend to: i) review the planning, financing, development and management of cities, bearing in mind their relevance for sustainable development; ii) recognize the role of national, regional and local authorities as well as civil society in the definition and implementation of urban policies; and iii) adopt integrated, sustainable, citizen-based approaches based on age and gender. 
In line with the New Urban Agenda, we also aim to identify the specific needs and behaviour of women and men urban planning and transport infrastructure for sustainable and inclusive growth, through the mainstreaming of the gender perspective. It is important to ensure the participation of women in policy and decision-making. It should also be pointed out in this context the protection against discrimination in access and fruition of goods and services available to the public, including housing, inter alia on the grounds of racial, ethnic, nationality, gender and disability. 
Also in the field of international commitments, it should be noted the UN Resilient Cities Campaign, which promotes the implementation of disaster reduction measures by local authorities as one of its guiding principles, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, where Portugal identified 25 towns as resilient. It should also be noted that the National Strategy for Preventive Civil Protection is in line 58 

with the Sendai Framework, with an action plan in place until 2020. 
Over the last 30 years, at the local level, the development of an environmental and citizenship culture took place in Portugal, as reflected in the strategies and plans designed and implemented by local governance assuming the responsibility for urban planning and spatial planning, promoting good use of public space and the promotion of social and territorial cohesion. That is, the creation of conditions for the development of sustainable cities and communities looking towards the future. 
At local level, regional authorities are crucial in promoting and defending the interests of the populations in the areas of public transport, both rural and urban, wealth, health, education, social work, housing, civil protection, environment and sanitation. We are witnessing an ever-growing involvement of local authorities in a number of networks and national and international initiatives, whose purpose is to disseminate good experiences, cooperation and knowledge sharing and dissemination of sustainable development practices. 
Recognizing that the Common Agenda for Integration of Third-country Nationals recommended that Member States further promote integration policies at local level, we point out the Network CLAIM \0xF3 A Local Network for a Service of Proximity, which, apart from providing information, gives support at the various stages in the reception and integration of migrants, in cooperation with local communities and promoting interculturalism, at the national level. As a reflection of the Strategic Plan for Migration for 2015-2020, the Municipal Plans for the Integration of Migrants (MPIM) can define and implement local policies for the integration of migrants in the territories, as a factor of development and strengthening of democracy and social dynamics. There are currently 19 MPIM under implementation, involving 21 municipalities, and it is expected to reach 50 MPII, by 2020.  
The National Housing Strategy 2015-2031 is the instrument that allows for the articulation of sustainable urban solutions, with the primary aim of creating conditions that facilitate the access of households, housing, location, quality, comfort, safety, accessibility, typology, occupancy status, mobility and surrounding environment. The Strategy proposes to take action in three areas: i) in the classification of accommodation; ii) urban regeneration; and iii) the rentals market. In addition, action is underway for the classification of accommodation. These measures are designed to: i) protect marginalized communities through the National Strategy for the Integration of Roma Communities; ii) safeguard homeless people through the National Strategy for the Integration of Homeless People; and iii) to resolve situations of acute housing shortages and social rehabilitation of degraded and equipment through the Programme PROHABITA, whose funding is allocated for the purchase of houses, infrastructure in real estate, construction of controlled-cost housing developments or rehabilitation of degraded empty buildings. 
In line with the 2030 Agenda, the 2020 Sustainable Cities Strategy for sustainable urban development seeks to advance and answer the needs for urban territory planning and take action to strengthen and consolidate the prospects and vision of territorial development. It contributes to the promotion of the necessary conditions for the competitiveness, sustainability and national cohesion pointing a medium and long-term way for integrated territorial development, in its economic, social, environmental, cultural, and governance dimensions. Its implementation requires the active involvement of various actors in the city and in the development and strengthening of the national urban system, both for the central and local public administration, the private sector and all other stakeholders, whose contribution is decisive for the achievement of objectives of urban sustainability. 
There are programmes for territories and urban regeneration. Those under preparation are the Financial 
	Instrument for the Rehabilitation and Urban Revitalization (with the support of the Portugal 2020), the 	59 
National Fund for the Rehabilitation of Buildings and Efficient House. Those in implementation are the Rehabilitate for Lease - Accessible Housing and Rehabilitate for Lease - Municipalities, both focusing on the financing of operations for the rehabilitation of older buildings that will be turned into social rental housing. 
Also under preparation or implementation of specific measures for housing rental, there are measures designed to: i) supporting the young through Programme Gate 65 \0xF3 Youth, leading to the awarding of a monthly grant to young people between the ages of 18 and 30 who, at the beginning of their professional life, are subject to greater mobility; ii) to protect the most vulnerable tenants through the revision of the Novo Regime de Arrendamento Urbano (New Regime for Urban Lease) and the Regime de Arrendamento (Lease Regime); iii) the long-term lease through regulation of housing; and iv) fostering the rental market through the Mercado Social de Arrendamento (Social Lease Market), a stock of real estate available for rental for middleincome households with difficulty in gaining access to the free market. 
Despite improvements in the living conditions of populations \0xF3 a significant decrease of populations living in sheds and camps, thanks to Rehousing Programmes (Special Rehousing Programme, Special Programme Rehousing Programme/Family and the Programme PROHABITA) carried out over the past 30 years, Portugal faces two major challenges regarding public financing of public policies and programmes of rehousing of families living in precarious housing and the pursuit of a policy of rehabilitation of social housing estates. 
In addition to housing, the well-being of people and the sustainability of cities are intrinsically related to accessibility. In Portugal, transport is responsible for about 25% of CO2 emissions, in line with other EU countries. In the global challenge to fight climate change, in which Portugal positions itself in the global leadership, reducing emissions means improving transport efficiency and promoting more sustainable solutions. Transport accounts for 15% of household budgets of Portugal (largest expenditure after housing), since it is thru the transport system that people access their employment, education and public services. Ensuring accessibility is therefore a focus of public policies. Promoting accessibility, public transport and creating real alternatives to the use of the private car based on shared and collective modes, is one of the fastest ways to combat isolation, promote inclusion and reduce the cost of transport and thereby increase the disposable income of households. 
The national policy for transport is based on 4 areas, namely: i) decentralization of the Transport Authority, which can improve the transparency, economic efficiency of the system, rationalization of resources and supply, and the identification of the groups at risk and the design of inclusion policies; ii) when regulating flexible transport, particularly for the low density areas, reduce the cost and increase the supply of public transport; iii) the promotion of a policy of positive discrimination of the most fragile groups through the support of Social + (for access to the transport system financially more disadvantaged groups) and the relaunch of the Pass Sub23 (contribution to the accessibility of young people to the transport system before they have legal authorization to drive and in time to be able to contribute to the consideration of even purchasing an auto); IV) in the de-carbonization by changing the taxation on cars in order to encourage the introduction of plug-in hybrid cars, low emission technology, the recovery of the current network of electric mobility in the sector of renewable and other flexible solutions (such as car-sharing and bike sharing). 
The main challenge facing Portugal is the intensive use of road transport to commute. This trend can be reversed through: i) public transport quality, inclusive, integrated and easily accessible; ii) promoting soft transport modes (pedestrian and bicycle), infrastructure, creation of green areas and the reduction of individual transport areas; iii) expansion of the network of electric mobility, through its rehabilitation and resizing; and iv) maximizing the accessibility of the transport system, through the development of a system of 60 universal and integrated mobility (Family Pass and Mobility Card). 
In the framework of the preservation of archaeological and architectural heritage as a distinguishing factor and creator of identity and sense of belonging, we highlight the potential of cultural events to foster social cohesion and the economy, particularly in sparsely populated areas in order to combat desertification. The national legislation governing implementation and management of World Heritage Sites in Portugal established the existence of fifteen Assets classified as world heritage, and there is provision for increasing this number. In this area, we point out two major challenges: i) the management and conservation of Assets needs to have sufficient resources for the proper management of assets which are of different types; and ii) the management of visitors increased to levels not foreseen and there is a growing difficulty to give response to minimize impacts. 
In the framework of the safeguard of the intangible heritage, the United Nations Organization for Education, Science and Culture (UNESCO) Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity, was established in 2008 by UNESCO as a repository of cultural diversity and creative expressions, and practices that help to demonstrate the diversity and cultural heritage and to raise awareness of its importance The active engagement of Portugal with the initiative resulted in the inclusion of Fado, urban popular song of Portugal (2011), the Mediterranean diet (2013), the Cante Alentejano, polyphonic singing from Alentejo, southern Portugal (2014) and Falconry, a living human heritage (2016) in that list. Moreover, in the List of Intangible Cultural Human Heritage in Need of Urgent Safeguarding, composed of cultural elements which require urgent measures to be kept alive, we point out the inclusion by Portugal of the Manufacture of cowbells (2015) and the Bisalh\0x201Ees black pottery manufacturing process (2016). 
Linked to this component of intangible cultural heritage, tools were created to identify the intangible cultural heritage and, consequently, reinforcing feelings of belonging, strengthening territorial cohesion, such as the Collection Kit of Intangible Cultural Heritage involving communities since 2011, in particular young people. 
Finally, the National Waste Management Plan 2014-2020, establishes the strategic guidelines for the prevention and management of waste from the point of view of environmental protection and development of the country, aims to promote efficient use of natural resources in the economy and prevent/reduce the adverse impacts of the generation and management of resources. In this context, plans such as the Strategic Plan for Hospital Waste, the Strategic Plan for Industrial Waste Management and the Strategic Plan for Urban Waste 2020 and the National Strategy for Air 2020 aim to achieve compliance with the emission targets and air quality and to outline the course to reach WHO recommended levels. In addition, air policy is laid down in the Programme for the National Emission Ceilings and in the Transitional National Plan of Emissions for Large Combustion Plants. 
Despite the decline in recent years of the total municipal waste generation and direct deposition in landfills, the prevalence of undifferentiated collection and air pollution problems (especially in the densely populated urban areas) remain major challenges, which will require considerable effort given the short time frame until the target applies. 
 
 
 
61 
	 	
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Within the framework of the Constitution of the Portuguese Republic, to ensure the right to the environment in a context of sustainable development, it is for the State, through specific institutions and with the involvement and participation of citizens, to promote the efficient use of natural resources, safeguarding its capacity for renewal and ecological stability, with respect to the principle of solidarity between generations. In the National Reform Plan we have, as the main answer to the current economic challenges, the development of the circular economy in all sectors of activity, with the immediate aim of rational management of resources 62 with particular attention to material resources, energy, water and land use, making a clear link between environmental performance and socio-economic backgrounds. 
In a circular economy, the resources (materials, energy) mobilized shall be managed in such a way that its value remains at its highest levels, for as long as possible, thus reducing the need for raw materials and the generation of waste, reducing costs and mobilizing capital that may be transferred to wages, job creation and R&D. Portugal is currently developing the national action plan for the circular economy and invests in this area, in particular, through the Environmental Fund. For 2017, Portugal has allocated 1 million euro to support projects of circular economy, in the run-up to 2019. 
The option for a model of development based on the assumption of the existence of unlimited resources, either at the level of natural resources or of natureis capacity to absorb and process the waste and effluents generated by human activity, is at the origin of many environmental problems of global reach, such as climate change. The intensification of economic activities and its consequences contribute today to the depletion of natural resources and the natural capacity for absorption and processing of waste and effluents are pressing issues that are either present at the top level of policy making, or in society at large. In this context, environmental policies have gained importance over the last decades and have become inseparable to a balanced economic and social development.  
The current Government defined three strategic pillars in the area of Environment: i) de-carbonizing society (focus on climate, energy efficiency, sustainable mobility); ii) develop the circular economy (focus on dematerialization, collaborative and sustainable consumption, product design and efficient use of resources, recycling of resources); and iii) the territory (spatial planning, coastal water, nature and biodiversity). This strategic vision is reinforced by the Commitment for Green Growth (2015) that promotes green economic activities, promoting resource efficiency and sustainability. 
Contributing to the Europe 2020 Strategy, the Operational Programme for Sustainability and Efficient Use of Resources (POSEUR) of the Portugal 2020 sets out the main national environmental objectives and targets to be achieved by 2020, and, in this context, the priority of sustainable growth based on more efficient use of resources. There are various instruments and policies with the aim of changing patterns of production and consumption creating value, optimizing production factors, increasing efficiency and reducing costs while minimizing environmental impacts, including the National Waste Management Plan (PNGR/2014-2020), the National Strategy for Environmentally Responsible Public Purchasing (ENCPE 2020), the National Strategy for Environmental Education 2020 (ENEA 2020). 
The PNGR 2014-2020 establishes the strategic guidelines for the prevention and management of waste with a view to protecting the environment and development of the country. It has two objectives: i) to promote efficient use of natural resources in the economy; and ii) to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of the generation and management of resources. In addition, sectorial strategic plans such as the Strategic Plan for Hospital Waste (PERH), the Strategic Plan for Industrial Waste Management (PESGRI) and, of relevance, the current Strategic Plan for Urban Waste 2020 (PERSU 2020). 
The PERSU 2020 has the main objective to ensure a high level of environmental and human health protection and, to this end, provides: i) minimizing waste generation and its harmfulness, and their integration in the production process; ii) to phase out the landfilling of waste, with a view to eradicating direct deposition of municipal waste by 2030; iii) involve the citizens in this strategy, focusing on information and facilitating recycling. Concerning packaging waste, Portugal intends: i) to increase collection rates, global and sectorial 63 recycling and recovery for different packaging waste materials; and ii) to maintain the commitment to achieve at least 60% recovery of packaging waste (by weight) of which at least 55% should correspond to recycling.  
Currently, the management of waste in Portugal is based on solutions such as: collection of packaging waste, paper and other waste streams (recoverable \0xECecopoints and door-to-door collection centres) with a view to sorting and recycling; separate collection of biodegradable municipal waste to organic recovery by composting or anaerobic digestion; separate collection of municipal waste sent to mechanical treatment or mechanicalbiological treatment for subsequent dispatch to recycling or other recovery process; separate collection of municipal waste for energy recovery (incineration of waste); and landfilling of the non-recoverable fractions or direct deposition, only when other options are not available. 
In the context of the Europe 2020 Strategy, the Green Paper (2001) and the Directives on Public Procurement and Concessions of 2014, public procurement is identified as an instrument of high potential for policy integrating economic, social and environmental factors. At national level, with the aim of stimulating green public procurement policy, the National Strategy for Environmentally Responsible Public Purchasing 2020 was approved to contribute to promoting the reduction of pollution and the consumption of natural resources, by examining the economic lifecycle of products and services procured by public authorities on the basis of the European Unionis Green Public Procurement (GPP) criteria. 
In addition, the National Strategy for Environmental Education 2020 is built around the 3 thematic areas \0xF3 de-carbonizing the society, making the economy circular and add value to the territory n and in the context of environmental education for sustainability, initiatives such as the Network of Teachers/Project Coordinators for Environmental Education Projects, the training of rangers of the Servi\0xC1o de Prote\0xC1\0x201Eo da Natureza e do Ambiente (the environmental branch of the National Republican Guard), the European Mobility Week and the European Week for Waste Reduction, the Eco-Schools Programme, the Youth Environment Reporter, the Project COASTWATCH, among other projects of European exchange and cooperation with the PALOP, such as Project Cape Verde. 
In the area of access to information, public participation in decision-making and access to justice in environmental matters, the Aarhus Convention, to which Portugal is party since 2003, frames a number of initiatives, such as the Participate Platform (public participation in environmental decision-making), the eJustice Portal (systematization of information gathered at European level on access to environmental justice) or the Kiev Protocol on Pollutant Release and Transfer Register (PRTR). 
On the other hand, the Green Tax Reform (2014) must also be mentioned, which ensues changes to a set of tax rules in the energy and environmental sectors, transport, water, waste, land use, forests and biodiversity, introducing a system of taxation of plastic bags and to encourage the dismantling of vehicles in end-of-life. The reduction of taxes on gasoline and the raising of taxes by an equal amount in diesel with the aim of altering the current pattern of consumption and promoting the reduction of pollution levels deserve mention as well. It is thus for individual citizens and companies to choose more sustainable behaviour, from an environmental and economic point of view. 
Under this objective, we point out the Integrated Product Policy, in the field of sustainable use of resources and reducing its environmental impact, creating the conditions for company policy for sustainability, ecoefficiency, in promoting the change of production and consumption patterns, through the proposal and incentive of policies encouraging public and private green purchasing and supporting entities wishing to 
	Voluntary Environmental Management Systems (EMAS, ISO 14001 and environmental labels) and Local 	64 

Agenda 21. This initiative is part of the European efforts translated in the adoption of a Green Paper on Integrated Product Policy, in 2001 
Finally, it should be noted that, at European level, the Action Plan for Sustainable Consumption and Production and a Sustainable Industrial Policy (2008), extends the scope of the Directive on the eco-design of products and the Ecolabel and Eco-Management and Audit Scheme were reviewed. In line with instruments of voluntary nature, the Ecolabel aims at reducing the negative impact of consumption and production on the environment, health, climate and natural resources, promoting products with a high level of environmental performance; the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme serves to promote continuous improvements in the environmental performance of organizations by the establishment and implementation of environmental management systems, as well as the provision of relevant information to the public and other interested parties. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Constitution establishes the right to a healthy living environment, and ecologically balanced, sustainable development as an outstanding social value. In this context, the State is tasked with proposing measures to advance this constitutional right: i) prevent and control pollution; ii) regional planning with a view to a balanced economic and social development; iii) protection and enhancement of landscape and ensure nature conservation and preservation of cultural values of historic and artistic interest; iv) promote efficient use of 
natural resources with respect to the principle of solidarity between generations; v) promoting the integration 
                                                                                              65 of environmental objectives into sectorial policies; vi) promoting education and respect for the environment; and vii) ensuring that tax policy development compatible with environmental protection and the quality of life. This issue has particular importance in the context of National Reform Programme and in the Portugal 2020, in view of the measures which aim at the gradual de-carbonization of the economy and sustainable mobility, encouraging the use of alternative and clean energy sources, and a better use of resources. 
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is dedicated to the fulfilment of the Europe 2020 Strategy, namely with the objective of promoting sustainable growth. The conservation of the environment and reduction of human impact on nature are pillars of the strategy, on the understanding that these contemplate the size of the economic growth and contribute to the economic and social development of the European Union. The political understanding that the EU \0xF3 reflecting their greater historical and economic strength \0xF3 should take for itself the ambitious objective of reducing domestic emissions by 80-95% in 2050 (compared to 1990 levels) led to the adoption of the EU Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change. 
Action under this priority will require that Portugal complies with its international commitments, namely regarding the Agenda 21 (1992), the Kyoto Protocol (1997) and, more recently, the Paris Agreement (2015). 
With regard to cooperation with partner countries, it is worth noting the recent presentation by developed countries for leveraging public and private funding and for the climate, to mobilize 100 billion dollar per year by 2020, to which Portugal joined and committed itself to continue the development of partnerships, in particular with the PALOP, for a total amount of 10 million euro for the period 2017-2020, through the Environmental Fund, a financial instrument to support environmental policies to the achievement of SDGs and the fulfilment of the commitments on climate change, water, waste and nature conservation and biodiversity. 
 
In this respect, it should also be noted that Portugal has a history of successful international cooperation on climate change, for example, in Mozambique, with the Renewable Energy Project Atlas, the Project for Installation of 50 Solar PV Systems, the National Plan of Support to Urban Sanitation, with a view to reduce emissions and adapt to climate change; the Project for Low Carbon Development Resilient Strategies, in Cape Verde, Mozambique and S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe; and implementation on behalf of the EU in the form of delegated cooperation, the European Union Climate Change Support Programme in Timor-Leste, aiming at increasing the capacity of the most vulnerable East Timorese districts to cope with the effects of climate change, sustainable management of natural resources and the use of local development. In 2015, the Portuguese Carbon Fund financed programmes in the PALOP countries and East Timor, which had a total value of more than 4 million euro for mitigation, adaptation and strengthening of national capacity in these countries. 
Public policies to combat climate change are an integral part of a number of sectorial policies in Portugal, whether it is in agriculture, industry, energy or mobility. The political commitment made in the transition to a low carbon and resilient economy led to the establishment of the Inter-ministerial Commission for Air and Climate Change, which ensures the coordination and integration of environmental concerns in various sectors. 
The main instruments of national policy in the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and adaptation to climate change are based on the National Strategy for Climate Change (ENAAC 2020) and the National Climate Change Programme (PNAC) 2020/2030. It should be noted, however, the complementarity with other instruments, such as: The National Energy Efficiency Action Plan, the National Renewable Energy Action, the Electric Mobility Programme and the National Strategy on Air. 
The National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change (ENAAC 2010 strategy 2010-2013) was based on a two-dimensional strategy of adaptation and mitigation, and its complementarity allows for the promotion of 66 proper planning and the development of a resilient economy and society, competitive and low-carbon, by: i) keeping updated and available scientific knowledge; ii) reducing vulnerability and increasing capacity to respond, with a view to minimizing the effects of climate change; iii) raising awareness on climate change and its impacts; and iv) promoting international co-operation, supporting the most vulnerable countries (notably in the framework of CPLP), with a perspective of policy coherence. 
However, the difficulties in setting up the scientific panel originally proposed and articulation of the different sectorial groups have led to the new definition and formulation of the National Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change 2020 (ENAAC2020). In line with the EU framework, it provides for \0xECa country adapted to the impacts of climate change, through the continuous implementation of solutions based on scientific knowledge and good practice and lays down the objectives, activities and the type of organization and operation of the Strategy with a view to a country adapted to the impacts of climate change, through the continuous implementation of solutions based on scientific knowledge and good practice. The Strategy aims at: i) improving knowledge on climate change risks, impacts and consequences; ii) implementing adaptation measures; and iii) promoting integration and monitoring of climate change adaptation into public policies and sectorial policies, including planning, sustainable urban development and the management of water resources.  
Monitoring of the ENAAC 2020 has allowed for: i) strengthening links between sectors and thematic areas for information sharing and harmonization of approaches; ii) investments in scientific knowledge to address information gaps of a sectorial nature, the level of vulnerability to climate change and extreme events; iii) the development of a National Adaptation Platform as repository for all the background information on the scientific and technical adaptation at national level; and iv) the development of a system of collection of information on projects and actions of different actors at national, regional and local levels, calling for the voluntary participation of actors. In response to the above challenges, financing will be the decisive factor, and it should be noted, in the context of European support funds, the contribution of instruments such as the Efficiency and Sustainable Use Programme, complemented by LIFE, Horizon2020 and the Rural Development Programme (PDR 2020). 
In this context, we wish to highlight a number of initiatives, such as: design and implementation of the Programme AdaPT, a pilot programme for climate change adaptation projects in Portugal, financed by the Financial Mechanism of the European Economic Area and by the Portuguese Carbon Fund; and the International Conference on Water and Climate Adaptation, organized under the Mechanism. 
The National Climate Change Programme 2020-2030 seeks to ensure a sustainable path of reduction of national emissions of greenhouse gases, ensuring compliance with the commitments of national mitigation in stages: -18% to -23% (2020) and -30% to -40% (2030) in relation to 2005. The programme sets sectorial targets for reducing emissions and identifies the set of policy options and future measures together with the relevant policy sectors such as transport, energy, agriculture and forestry. Thus, it encourages integration of mitigation objectives into sectorial policies and creating a dynamic approach to planning, giving greater responsibility to identify policies and measures. 
Also, it is important to note the creation of conditions for, and the promotion of the involvement of women in shaping and implementing public policies for adaptation and mitigation, also taking into account their tendency to adopt more sustainable behaviour and sensitive to the green economy. In this sense, the Government is committed to implement mechanisms for ensuring a minimum representation of both sexes in decisionmaking. 
                                                                                              67 Despite progress in environmental protection and climate policy, Portugal still faces some challenges up-ahead. Firstly, the objective of neutrality of greenhouse gas emissions in 2050 is a challenge that reaches out to the wider society in a truly transformative way, which is why the involvement of all stakeholders, including citizens and civil society organizations is essential. Consequently, Portugal is in the process of drafting its National Low Carbon Roadmap for 2050, which will facilitate the transition to a low-carbon, competitive economy, an international target with which Portugal is decisively committed, aiming to be a neutral country in terms of greenhouse gas emissions in 2050. Secondly, the EU has played a leading role with regard to global warming mitigation and Portugal believes it has the abilities to be at the forefront of this movement. Finally, given the wide coastal exposure of the country, Portugal has the firm objective to become more resilient to the impacts of climate change, which will be particularly damaging for coastal areas with the expected rise in the average level of sea water, among other effects. 
 
In a geopolitical context, Portugal is the largest coastal State of the European Union, with a central role in the Atlantic basin. Our maritime areas make up around 4 million km\0x2264 and define a continuous inter-territorial Sea which gives both archipelagic and Atlantic dimensions to the country. Thus, Portugal takes a strong role and commitment, in the international dimension, for the sustainability and governance of the oceans.  
In the context of the 2030 Agenda, Portugal worked to include a specific target for the Sea, promoting a multi- 68 sectorial integrated approach, especially in the National Strategy for the Sea 2013-2020, which frames the various public policies and sectorial and transversal actions, and advocates a sustainable development model based on the promotion of the maritime economy. In the perspective of an integrated maritime policy, we assumed the guiding principles of the integrated management such as the precautionary principle and the effective participation of all. For example, maritime spatial planning, surveillance of human activities at sea and the environmental monitoring are essential elements of this policy.  
In the framework of the Portugal 2020 and the Operational Programme for the Sea 2020, approved in November 2015 with the aim of implementing the support measures in Portugal under the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund, we have adopted the following strategic priorities: i) promoting environmentally sustainable, resource efficient, innovative and knowledge-based fisheries and competitive aquaculture; ii) fostering the implementation of the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) through the improvement and supply of scientific knowledge and collection and management of data, and through the provision of support to monitoring, control and enforcement; iii) increasing employment and territorial cohesion through the promotion of economic growth, social inclusion and job creation; iv) fostering marketing and processing by the improvement of market organization for fishery and aquaculture products and encouragement of investments in the processing and marketing sectors; and v) fostering the implementation of the Integrated Maritime Policy. 
The sustainability of the sector implies the need for sustainable fisheries development, not only from the point of view of resources but also of the marine environment and coastal fishing areas (ecosystems and biodiversity in particular). 
Accordingly, among the measures provided for in Sea 2020 stand aids to limit the impact of fishing on the marine environment and adapting fishing to the protection of species, as well as the protection and restoration of marine biodiversity, including the collection of lost fishing gear and marine litter. In what concerns sustainability, support to the area of fishing ports, in particular, investments in the field of storage, treatment of waste or those with the aim to reduce discards of fish, the conservation of under-used components of the catch, the protection of the environment, including facilities for waste and marine litter collection should be highlighted. 
Finally, the sustainable development of coastal zones is also a priority in the framework of supports given to the sector, as a result of Portugalis maritime vocation and the mainly urban nature of fishing communities, which are characterized by a certain degree of economic fragility and social marginalization/exclusion. In this respect, the Sea 2020 encourages the development of local strategies taking into account the specific circumstances of each of the coastal communities, with the adoption of a bottom-up model played by Local Action Groups. The development strategy is aimed at job creation in the maritime context and enhancing territorial cohesion of fishing communities, with a particular emphasis on creating new business opportunities generating additional income from fisheries and aquaculture activities, focused on innovation in order to remain attractive to younger generations. 
In the context of international commitments assumed by Portugal in this field, we highlight the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), the International Maritime Organization Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL), the International Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic (OSPAR), the UN Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD), the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) of the European Union, the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), the Arrangement Concerning the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of 69 the Sea Relating to the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (UNFSA). 
In the thematic area of Oceans, it is also important to emphasize the Conference in support of the implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14 on Oceans (The Ocean Conference), which sought to mobilize global efforts of transformation in the way the international community collectively responds to the challenges posed by the trend of deterioration in the health of our Oceans and marine resources, and the impact that this has on people, planet and prosperity. In this context, Portugal has shown high relevance and visibility conducting, as a co-facilitator, the preparatory process of the Conference, and concluding the intergovernmental negotiations of the political declaration adopted (Call for Action).  
It is also important to highlight the organization by Portugal of this yearis International Oceans Meeting , an annual initiative which aims to consolidate four major vectors: i) strengthening the political initiative and a leading position of Portugal in the context of European and international policies; ii) enhancing and maximizing the role of science and research in the economy; iii) to give public visibility to national and international companies and industries related to the sea; and iv) promoting literacy on Oceans among young people. In parallel, the \0xECOceans Business Week, a major meeting of the maritime economy, brings together projects and entities joined by the importance of the sea and oceans for the balance of ecosystems to the preservation and development of marine resources, management of continental shelves and international connectivity. 
Also, we wish to highlight the active participation of Portugal in a number of international organizations and programmes of international scientific infrastructure, including the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC-UNESCO), the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation (NAFO), the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC), the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), the European Marine Board (EMB), European Centre of Information on Science and Technology (Sea EurOcean), or the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI). 
The strategy of Portuguese cooperation, with its vector on the Community of Portuguese Speaking Countries, is based on the Atlantic and Indian oceans as its main pillars. Portugal provides a link between East and West and an interface between the northern and southern hemispheres, valued by maritime culture, language and trade.  
The development of a research and innovation agenda for the Atlantic, together with their linkage to the stimulus to international scientific and technological cooperation, scientific employment in Portugal and business development are critical aspects of the AIR Center, Atlantic International Research Centre. In the framework of transatlantic and North-South cooperation, this international organization aims at the development of a network of research and innovation, based on the use of existing infrastructure around the world, by encouraging synergies to promote research in the areas of Geophysics, Energy, Climate, Oceans, Geography and Spatial Research. 
There are several instruments of national policy on the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development, such as; the National Strategy for the Sea 2013-2020, the National Strategy for Integrated Coastal Zone Management Strategy of 2020, the Research and Innovation 
Strategy for Smart Specialization, of national scope, the Regional Strategies, the Legal Framework for Development of Maritime Spatial Planning, the National Maritime Action Plan for the Coast \0xF3 Litoral XXI, 
	Coastal Management Programmes, the Coastal Monitoring Programme for Mainland Portugal (COSMO), the 	70 

National Biological Sampling Plan, the National System for the Monitoring of Bivalve and Molluscs, the Regulation of the Support Framework for Onboard Investments in Energy Efficiency, and a Programme of Measures to ensure the well-being of the marine waters and ecosystems. 
It should also be detailed that the national approach to the challenges that the 2030 Agenda poses on ocean issues calls for an integrated maritime policy and is, therefore, crucial to have knowledge of the oceansi processes and the monitoring of its environmental status, but also a maritime spatial planning to ensure that human and economic activities are developed in a sustainable manner and respecting environmental values. Part of this approach aims for the establishment of marine protected areas of appropriate size and to ensure that the management of fisheries stocks is conducted in a sustainable way. On the other hand, marine litter is also a matter of global concern which cannot be addressed in isolation by any country.  
Maritime spatial planning is certainly one of the major challenges facing the country, not only by the size of the area to be covered, which accounts for around 10% of water bodies in the Atlantic Ocean, but also because the law of the sea requires different approaches from those used for land based spatial planning. While it is true that national maritime spatial planning is a key tool for the blue economy, the fact remains that, taking stock of the size of the Portuguese Sea, this planning exercise will contribute substantively for the protection of the Atlanticis environmental sustainability. 
The size of the immersed areas under the sovereignty or jurisdiction of Portugal will be around 3.8 million km\0x2264, corresponding to approximately 40 times its land territory, considering the size of the Exclusive Economic Zone with around 1.7 million km\0x2264 and the extension of the continental shelf, with around 2.1 million km\0x2264, provided for in the Proposal for the Extension of the Continental Shelf of Portugal. In this vast Portuguese Sea, there are a number of seamounts of high relevance for biodiversity, which are habitats threatened and/or declining in accordance with the OSPAR Convention. To this end, Portugal intends to create more Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) within its maritime jurisdiction; this a specific aim of the Sea 2020. In particular, the Programme of Measures referred to above provides for the creation of two major MPA, one south of the Azores (MPA of Great Meteor), and the other between the archipelago of Madeira and the Iberian Coast (MPA of Madeira-Tore) \0xF3 with 123,000 km\0x2264 and 132,000 km\0x2264. 
This enormous Portuguese Sea will bring many opportunities for the exploration of marine resources and an increase in economic activities connected with the sea, but also great challenges for the management and sustainable use of marine ecosystems, supported by thorough knowledge of the whole area. This will only be possible with ocean observation systems sustainable in the long term, requiring major operational capacity and financial effort. The development of systems for monitoring the marine environment, based on new technologies (e.g. satellites and continuous trackers) is of great importance for the management and conservation of its marine ecosystems which need appropriate methodologies to provide reliable and complete data, both for scientific advice and for implementation and control purposes of the sustainable development of the maritime economy. 
Portugalis History and Culture in respect to Oceans and the extension of the immersed territory in the North Atlantic led to the drafting of national policies defining priorities such as achieving a leading role in international knowledge and protection, in particular regarding the in-situ monitoring of the Deep Sea and active participation in international fora that deal with research, observation/modelling (operational oceanography) and exploration of the sea, contributing for Portugalis active role in the international context of maritime affairs.  
As a global concern, marine litter commands the mobilization of different agents and stakeholders, with a view 71 to promoting knowledge on environmental monitoring and the implementation of measures for reduction or elimination of waste and encouraging the cleaning of beaches, for example. In this respect, Portugal has had a policy of contributing to the quality of the oceans, including the pilot project \0xECFishing for a Sea Without Litter, with the aim to raise awareness in the fishing fleet for the collection of waste caught in fishing gears.  
In the coming years, Portugal will continue the work on fiscal and customs investigation and inspection, while reinforcing integrated maritime surveillance, patrolling the coast and the countryis territorial sea, monitoring fishing activities, landings, culture and commercialization of marine species, contributing to ensure the balance and sustainability of marine life in its national territory. For implementation, we aim to use unmanned vehicles in nature and environment protection, as well as protection and rescue in coastal areas and the territorial sea. 
Portugalis commitment in maritime affairs still faces challenges which need to be translated into opportunities, namely in the production and management of scientific knowledge on marine resources for the promotion of health and well-being, in particular to develop marine biotechnology and its implementation in pharmaceuticals, cosmetics or in the food industry. Moreover, the fight against climate change requires particular attention to ocean acidification, through mitigation and adaptation to the adverse effects of climate change. 
 
 
 
 
According to the Constitution, the State has fundamental tasks in the economic and social sphere to protect nature and the environment, preserve natural resources and ensure proper planning. To ensure the right to good environment, within the framework of sustainable development, the State has to establish and develop nature reserves and recreational parks, to classify and protect traditional landscapes and sites, to ensure the conservation of nature, and promote more efficient use of natural resources, safeguarding its capacity for renewal and ecological stability, with respect to the principle of solidarity between generations. 
                                                                                              72 Within the framework of regional planning policy, the State has also to actively pursue actions of definition and implementation of proper planning, either as a specific purpose or as a specific activity, to develop the effectiveness of social, cultural and environmental rights and fulfilment of the objectives of economic, social and territorial cohesion. 
In the current National Reform Programme, we highlight the promotion of territorial development as a pillar in in the promotion of priorities such as nature values and biodiversity, encompassing a wide range of measures which are reflected in the Forest Reform, in the field of forest management and spatial planning, ownership of forests and protection of forests. 
With the aim to add value to the territory, the National Programme for Spatial Planning Policy seeks to give a strategic framework, where nature and suitability of the natural values within the territory are considered together with the national economic and social components, following the reasoning that a territory valued by its population results in an increased ability to respond to societyis challenges. Adding value to the territory through proper planning should be viewed as a mean for the coordination of the special manifestations of different sectorial policies in the strategic definition of land use, in light of the adopted development model, safeguarding natural values, resources and systems necessary to the use of the territory. 
In essence, national policies on nature conservation aim to project classified areas as strategic assets to national development by directing action towards the objective reality of species and habitats, but also by valuing human presence in the environment when creating symbiotic exchanges with nature. In this sense, protected areas should constitute a development purpose that seeks to value human presence and recognizes their importance in the whole of biodiversity, for which it is necessary to create conditions to keep people living in these areas by developing economic structure to enable and sustain social dynamics, making use of the singular natural resources that these areas provide, and that sets them apart. 
In this context, it is necessary to promote greater use of spaces, whether for residential purposes or temporary occupation from tourism, to support the sustainable regeneration of relevant idle buildings that exist in protected areas, improving living conditions and allowing for their effective use. Portugal intends to strengthen its policies of nature conservation by improving the status of habitats and species and overall biodiversity. The coastal areas, rivers and their floodplains are priority areas in the conservation of natural resources. Therefore, particular attention is given to prevention, protection and adaptation of riverine and coastal areas, including through integrated interventions. In this context, the Action Plan for the Protection and Exploitation of the Coast 2016-2020 will serve as a tool for integrated management of operational objectives and, the soon-to-becompleted Flood Risk Management Plan, including prediction models and alert systems, will take into account the characteristics of the particular hydrographical basins or sub-basins. 
In the Major Planning Options for 2016-19, aside from protecting the natural capital, nature, and value the services of marine ecosystems, the prevention of biodiversity loss constitutes a strategic design and it is fundamental to ensure public investment in the sector by increasing human resources, technological ability and knowledge, to face one of the key environmental threats, together with climate change, by promoting proper land management and usage of natural parks. Moreover, biological diversity should be perceived a strategic asset, one that can be economically valued, like protected areas or Natura 2000 network sites, justifying for example the need for determined action for the requalification of river ecosystems and wetlands \0xF3 in close cooperation with the Spanish authorities, in the case of international rivers. In the context of promoting the diversification of the economy and the creation of jobs in rural areas, we highlight the promotion of traditional products, often associated with protected areas \0xF3 and the production of environmental services and amenities 73 of leisure and recreation. 
In the framework of the Portugal 2020, the Rural Development Programme (RDP) 2014-2020 provides support for Natura 2000 network in the preservation of the natural resources, by promoting and protecting biodiversity within the community network, support to traditional systems resilient and sustainable, support for the recovery and installation of riverine galleries and agro-environment support to beekeeping. The Programme also provides for improving the resilience and environmental value of forests, support for agro-forestry or forestry holdings for the protection of habitats, biodiversity, forest adaptation to climate change and promotion of ecosystem services. In another dimension, the RDP2020 promotes the improvement of the planning and management of hunting and fishing resources in inland waters. 
In the context of the Common Agriculture Policy, the Conditionality system (established by the set of rules and obligations to be observed by beneficiaries of direct payments and some rural development support) is divided into: i) the Statutory Management Requirements (relative to nitrates; aimed at the conservation of wild birds and the conservation of natural habitats and of flora and wild fauna; as well as for areas classified as relating to protecting the collection of groundwater for public supply); and ii) Good Agricultural and Environmental Conditions (water, soil and carbon sequestration, landscape and minimum levels of maintenance). We should also point out the range of beneficial practices for the climate and the environment (greening) that beneficiaries of the basic payment have to undergo, beyond conditionality, including: i) crop diversification; ii) the maintenance of ecological focus areas, such as safeguarding and improvement of biodiversity on farms; and iii) maintenance of permanent grassland and permanent pasture, relevant in carbon sequestration. 
 
In the framework of sustainable forest management, and in close liaison with the RDP2020, the National Forestry Strategy sets out six strategic objectives, namely: i) to minimize risks of fire and biotic agents; ii) territory specialization; iii) improve forest management and productivity of settlements; iv) internationalization and adding value to products; v) overall improvement of efficiency and competitiveness of the sector; and vi) rationalization and simplification of policy instruments. It is one of the reference documents for implementation of the various measures and policies of Forestry Law, including the basic tools and specific Forest Planning, with particular emphasis in the Regional Forest Spatial-Management Plans (PROF) and Forest Management Plans (FMP) as well as the Permanent Forest Fund. 
In combating desertification and promoting land restoration of degraded soil, we highlight the importance of the National Action Programme to Combat Desertification, with 4 strategic objectives: i) to promote the improvement of living conditions of populations in vulnerable areas; ii) to promote sustainable management of ecosystems of vulnerable areas and the restoration of the areas affected; iii) create an overall benefit and explore synergies with climate change processes and biodiversity in vulnerable areas; and iv) promote and mobilize resources for the implementation of the Programme and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, namely by supporting cooperation with civil society for actions in third countries and the transfer of technology and best practices in spatial management. Measures which should be highlighted include crop diversification (greening), soil conservation and efficient use of water provided for in the RDP2020, the promotion of forestry, giving priority to areas susceptible to desertification, maintenance of agricultural activities in less-favoured areas in order to reduce the risk of land abandonment, and the production and certification of biologically diverse seed mixtures, ensuring more sustainable and extensive livestock production, allowing adaptation, increasing production and the quality of fodder and higher rates of CO2 
	sequestration, improving overall soil quality. 	74 

Also, we underline the importance of five agricultural science and technology cooperation projects: AGROTEC, AlentejoNet (agricultural testing in Alentejo), REDIA 2 (Research and Experimentation of Vineyard and Wine of Douro), REXIA 2 (Agricultural Research and Experimentation Farms) and the Mountains of Knowledge Partnership, for the creation of the Mountains National Research (2016), intended to take advantage of the scientific knowledge to explore and add value to agricultural, biotechnological, veterinary and mountain research. These networks operate through a cross cutting perspective, with a focus on the water cycle, agricultural systems and in the food value chain. In the conservation of mountain ecosystems, the Iberian wolf protection should also be noted, as well as the maintenance of pastures of high natural value, irrigation agriculture and dry farming, promoting extensive traditional and mountain farming systems, compatible with the preservation of the soil, water and biodiversity resources. 
Access to preserved genetic resources and to the product of breeding programmes is carried out in accordance with the international and national standards, by adding value to endogenous resources, and to foster the development of national agriculture, particularly in the context of the Nagoya Protocol, which extends the general framework of the UN Convention on Biological Diversity, aiming at the fair and equitable access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits derived from their use. Aiming at protection of forests against biotic and abiotic agents, we point out the support of RDP2020 to investments with environmental objectives of preserving biodiversity, including eradication of invading wood species, as well as regulating the introduction of non-native species of flora and fauna in the wild and the survey, monitoring and crop protection inspection programmes that seek knowledge and provide early warning of the introduction of alien species harmful to plants (pests and diseases). 
In the Autonomous Region of the Azores, the Rural Development Programme (PRORURAL) (+) defines measures to support agriculture, offering guidance for agricultural activity towards less intensive production systems aimed at the protection and conservation of biodiversity in agricultural areas, as well as the restoration and preservation of the landscape. On the other hand, it also provides for measures aimed at fostering the competitiveness of the forest sector, ensuring their multifunctional role, contributing to the environmental balance and protection of natural resources, but also by providing support to the forestry potential in forest areas affected by harmful biotic and abiotic agents. 
At the international level, we highlight Portugalis active participation in the Berne Convention on European 
Wildlife and Natural Habitats in Europe, the Bonn Convention on Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS), the Ramsar Convention on Wetlands with international interest for waterfowl and the Washington Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). 
 
The Portuguese Republic is a democratic state, based on rule of law, popular sovereignty, pluralism of expression and political democratic organization, on the respect and guarantee of effective fundamental freedoms and rights and on the separation and interdependence of power. In this sense, the Constitution upholds a set of fundamental rights, such as freedom and security, equality and non-discrimination, physical and moral integrity, freedom of reunion and protest, political participation, freedom of speech and expression, freedom of association, of consciousness, religion and cult. To all is assured the access to justice and the courts system for the protection of their rights and interests, and justice may not be denied due to economic, social or 76 

cultural insufficiency. Other rights provided for by the Constitution are the freedom of informing and the right to inform and to be informed, without hindrance or discrimination. 
The Constitution grants to the courts the exclusive power to defend the rights and interests of citizens, repress the violation of democratic legal rights and resolution of conflicts of interests, public and/or private, assuming its independence, subjected only to the Law, and prevalence on all authorities, and the immobility of judges. 
It is for the National Defence to ensure the respect for the constitutional order, democratic institutions and international conventions, national independence, the integrity of the territory and the freedom and security of citizens against any external attack or threat. The Armed Forces (FFAA) should therefore fulfil the Stateis international commitments in the military field, participate in humanitarian missions and international peacekeeping operations, cooperate in civil protection missions, and undertake technical-military cooperation in the broader context of the national cooperation policy. The Strategic Concept of National Defence establishes fundamental values such as the protection of human rights and international law, and the engagement in the promotion of European, Atlantic and international security and stability. 
In terms of regional commitments, Portugal is involved in the execution of the European instruments relating to violence and crime, such as: the Convention of the Council of Europe on Information on Foreign Law (1968), the Convention on the fight against corruption involving officials of the European Communities or officials of Member States of the European Union (1997), the Criminal Law Convention on Corruption of the Council of Europe (1999), the Lanzarote Convention (2007), the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (2008) and the Istanbul Convention (2011). Linked to this, Portugal has negotiated and approved bilateral agreements with several countries for cooperation in combating transnational organized crime and terrorism, from which we point out the activity of the Antiterrorism Coordination Unit, to promote concerted action and information sharing. 
Action in this field will also require compliance with other international commitments such as the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), the OECD Convention on Bribery of Foreign Public Officials in International Business Transactions (1997), the Aarhus Convention (1998) and the United Nations Convention against Corruption (2003).  
In the promotion of human security, ensuring not only the security of States but also of people, it should be noted that the security forces can act outside national jurisdiction in cooperation with foreign States or with international organizations, with a view to further develop a space of freedom, security and justice. Portugal is a mature agent in international security, recognizing that it materializes beyond the national geographic boundaries and that the creation of comprehensive security must be based on a wider international effort. Thus, in the framework of international organizations (UN, EU, NATO and OSCE), and also in the context of bilateral technical-military cooperation, Portugal stands out in adverse situations, strengthening its reputation and credibility, sharing collective responsibilities for international peace and security. 
Non-partisan and without political intervention, the Armed Forces participate in EU operations such as: EUNAVFORMED/Operation \0xECSophia, to combat illegal networks of migrant smuggling in the Mediterranean; the Maritime Operation against piracy in the Horn of Africa (EUNAVFOR Atalanta); in training of security forces in Somalia, Mali and the Central African Republic. Also to be noted is the participation in the European Border and Coast Guard Agency, in combating illegal immigration and its root causes. 
In the framework of the United Nations, Portugal participates in the United Nations Multidimensional 
77 
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA), the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and in monitoring the disarmament agreement between the Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces. 
Some of Portugalis main partner countries are fragile and/or affected by situations of fragility and supporting them is of particular importance to Portugal, both through bilateral and multilateral cooperation. 
At the bilateral level, Portugalis Cooperation attaches particular importance to peace building and state building, including institutional strengthening in key areas such as governance, rule of law, security and the provision of essential services. This aid has been aligned with international commitments assumed by Portugal, as the principles for good relations with the fragile States (adopted in 2007) and the New Deal for engagement with fragile states, also endorsed by Portugal, and in which some of the priority countries of the Portuguese Cooperation are also involved, such as East Timor and Guinea-Bissau. 
With regard to cooperation with partner countries, Portugal stood out as: the President of the Conference of Ministers of the Interior of the Western Mediterranean, which resulted in the Lisbon Declaration (2015), and contains commitments in the areas of fight against terrorism, organized crime, trafficking and irregular migration; in the Presidency of the Quadripartite Group of G4 (2015, composed of France, Morocco, Portugal and Spain) for cooperation between the Western Mediterranean countries that aims for closer collaboration in law enforcement and the management of migratory flows, the prevention of/fight against drug trafficking and terrorism; the President of the Open Skies Consultative Commission and the Forum for Security Cooperation and (2016), leading institutional efforts to promote the openness and transparency of the military, as well as in the discussions held at EU level with a view to developing a comprehensive approach to external conflict and crisis, better linking security and development dimensions. 
At the level of cooperation in Portuguese, we highlight projects developed in the framework of CPLP and PALOP such as: i) support for the technical harmonization of customs legislation of the CPLP countries, in the framework of the World Customs Organization; ii) the Technical-Police Cooperation Programmes in areas of security, border control and civil protection); iii) Technical-Military Cooperation projects, helping military institutions of partner countries to be, increasingly and sustainably, producers of security and inducers of development through technical consultancy in training and education, restoration of infrastructure, provision of equipment, supplemented by activities contributing to strengthening security and authority of the State at Sea. 
In the Defence dimension of the CPLP, we also point out the ongoing creation of a College of Defence of the CPLP, to give specialized training and capacity-building for military and civil forces from Member States. Another cooperative dimension worth mentioning is the signing of the Joint Maritime Surveillance Treaties for the waters under sovereignty or jurisdiction of Cape Verde and S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe, and the Open Sea Initiative, for the empowerment of the PALOP in joint surveillance and maritime safety. 
In national terms, we point out missions carried by the Armed Forces that cover activities such as: cooperation with law enforcement agencies, the collaboration with the National Civil Protection in response to disasters or public emergencies, in structured plans for emergency response, the monitoring of the Exclusive Economic Zone, Search And Rescue operations, air support to health emergencies, environmental protection, support to lifeguard services, protection of the natural heritage and prevention of fire, natural resources and research in the field of geography, cartography , hydrography, oceanography and marine environment. 
78 
It should also be highlighted that the key strategic instrument in the field of homeland security is the Internal Security Act (2008), to ensure security, safety and tranquillity, protecting people and property, to prevent and combat crime and contribute to ensuring the normal functioning of democratic institutions, the regular exercise of the rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens and respect for democratic rule. The measures provided for in this Act are intended to protect the life and integrity of individuals, the public peace and democratic order, including against terrorism, violent or highly organized crime, sabotage or espionage, to prevent and respond to major accidents or disasters, to protect the environment and to safeguard public health. 
In the area of the fight against corruption and bribery, and in order to further improve effectiveness in preventing and combating this type of crime, through the empowerment of enforcement authorities (Police) and the Department of the Attorney-Generalis Office responsible for economic and financial crime (Central Investigation and Prosecution Department), Portugal has ratified several multilateral instruments (in the framework of its participation in the UN, EU and OECD) to update national legislation in line with the recommendations made by these organizations. 
With regard to ensuring responsible, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making, we draw attention to the following legal mechanisms: i) the organic laws of the Public Administration, stating that, at the workplace, workers and their representatives may be consulted in the decision-making and, in the legal framework, the Organic Law on Referendum, guaranteeing citizens may propose to hold a referendum and exercise the right of legislative initiative; and ii) the Or\0xC1amento Participativo (Participatory Budget), with the aim of having more citizenis participation, bringing together people of politics, encouraging them to easily and actively participate in the choice of the project in which to invest. 
It is worth noting the focus on the activation of young people and their involvement in democratic institutions, including the dissemination of all relevant information to ensure the full exercise of their electoral rights, or through the Campaign 70J\0xA1!, raising awareness among the youth of their rights enshrined in the Constitution, in particular Article 70, giving them the information required for the full exercise of their rights and, at the same time, response to the concerns of young people. 
Concerning the rejuvenation of democracy, there is a focus on the involvement of young people in decision making through the co-management of public policies, including representative platforms of youth in the share capital of Movijovem, the body responsible for the management of the Youth Card initiative and youth mobility, as well as the involvement of civil society in drafting public policies and legislative revision, such as the law of youth associations and in the process of revision of the Ibero-American Convention on the Rights of Youth, for example. 
On matters related to birth registration, we make reference to the Project Nascer Cidad\0x201Eo (Born a Citizen Project) which allows new-borns to be registered before the civil registrar at the maternity/hospital soon after their birth. The Simplex Program+2016 also planned to ease registration and application of documentation, with measures such as Nascimento Online and Nascer Cidad\0x201Eo +. 
In this framework, strengthening the equality and social cohesion is particularly important in the context of the National Reform Programme and the Portugal 2020. Regarding the promotion of inclusive and just societies, we note the existence of legal systems of protection against discrimination at work, access to and use of goods and services on the basis of, inter alia, sex, racial, ethnic and national origin, religion, age, sexual orientation and disability, and the protection afforded to enforcement against racial discrimination, religious and sexual health. In terms of national strategy to promote equality between women and men, we highlight the V 79 National Plan for Gender Equality, Citizenship and Non-Discrimination 2014-2017, with special reference to the Agenda for Equality in Labour Market and Enterprise, which promotes, among others, a less segregated and more balanced participation between women and men in decision-making and in the labour market, while ensuring that companies and institutions more representative, participated and inclusive. 
Moreover, the Strategy to Combat Domestic and Gender Violence(2016) aims at ensuring national coverage of support services and protection for victims, in a territorial approach to policies, ensuring the definition of requirements and the articulation of competences between the various public and private actors involved, as well as the establishment of structures that respond to the needs of specific groups (LGBTI persons, victims of gender violence, amongst others), always involving civil society. In this context, we also point out the III National Action Programme against Female Genital Mutilation for 2014-2017. 
All offences committed against children and young people are considered, under the criminal law, of priority prevention and investigation. From the III National Plan for Preventing and Combating Trafficking in Human Beings 2014-2017, we wish to make reference to: i) the Network of Support and Protection of Victims of Trafficking, which seeks to prevent, protect and reintegrate victims of trafficking in human beings; ii) the National Referencing System for Victims of Trafficking in Human Beings, which sets out a series of guidelines for marking, identification and integration of victims in Portugal, setting out the procedures to be followed by the various professionals, with a focus on human rights and the victims; and iii) the Anti-Trafficking of People Unit, a legal unit specialized in signalling and monitoring victims of trafficking. From the National Strategy for the Rights of the Child 2017-2020, we underline the strategic objective to prevent and act in the different forms of violence against children, covering operational objectives and indicators in the field of prevention, security and appropriate monitoring of children victims of violence. 
It should be noted, in this context, the National Action Plan for the Implementation of the UN Security Council resolution 1325 on Women, Peace and Security (2000), which aims at preventing and combating gender-based violence, including sexual violence, diplomatic, military, security, justice and development, both internally and internationally. 
Promoting the participation of migrant communities and their representatives in decision-making processes on policies affecting them, the Migration Council brings together the main migrant communities in Portugal, and the Municipal Plans for the Integration of Migrants are designed and implemented from a platform composed of public and private entities, including migrantsi associations. The role of Intercultural Mediators in promoting the reception and integration of migrants should also be noted, by reducing barriers to access to services and public distrust of the government. 
Similarly, the degree of participation and representation of Roma communities, which started gaining expression with measures such as the Municipal Mediators Programme, promoted by the High Commissioner for Migration, and the Council of Europe ROMED Programme, as well as through the Advisory Group on the Integration of Roma Communities, where some Roma Associations are represented to enhance their involvement, following the review of the current National Strategy. 
 
As signalled by the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD, in the report \0xECA New DAC in a Changing World: Setting a Path for the Future" (January 2017), the financing needs of the Agenda in its external dimension are estimated to be between 3.3 and 5.5 trillion dollar per year, largely exceeding the 135 billion dollar amount spent yearly in Official Development Assistance (ODA). 
In this first report, aware of the huge gap between needs and available public means, Portugal chose to focus the chapter dedicated to SDG 17 on Development Cooperation, a field where new and innovative partnerships 
	have a central and inevitable role to play in achieving the ambitious targets set. 	81 

In 2016, and on the basis of still preliminary data, the Portuguese ODA amounted to 0.17% of the gross national income (GNI), an increase of around 0.16% compared to 2015. This increase represents a remarkable effort in absolute terms in light of the increase of GNI in 2016. Least Developed Countries (LDCs) are the main beneficiaries of the Portuguese ODA (53.2%), followed by Lower Middle Income Countries (30%), in line with commitments in the EU and the DAC for countries most in need. 
To enhance the quality of its external action in international cooperation and sustainable development, Portugal has to act on the basis of principles that will make it possible to realize partnerships for the implementation of SDGs, including: i) stepping away from a charity approach by investing in human and institutional capacity-building in order to facilitate the mobilization of investment and trade and to promote sustainability; ii) transition to a model of national, European and international, public and private co-financing , through the use of new sources of financing, some of which based on innovative mechanisms and partnerships (delegated cooperation, trilateral cooperation, creation of consortia with national bodies and/or external, public and private, blending); and iii) involvement of economic agents, academia and civil society. 
Portugal seeks to combine different types and modalities of aid, to complement and create synergies, such as: 
i) intervention in projects; ii) general contributions; iii) support programmes and funds; iv) budget support and sectorial funds; v) scholarships; vi) experts; and vii) technical assistance. 
The financing of various operations follows a series of guidelines, including: i) focus on priority sectors for partner countries and larger projects with more visibility; ii) the coordination with other donors; iii) the diversification and the use of new sources of financing; and iv) the partnership with international organizations or with the private sector. To promote the sharing of efforts to diversify sources of funding in order to better tackle todayis challenges with regard to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, Portugal has set as one of its priorities the development of innovative partnerships with different actors, including local authorities, and within the framework of civil society, academia and the private sector, as well as multilateral partners such as the European Union, through Delegated Cooperation, and with other donors, to make a firm commitment in Trilateral and Triangular Cooperation. 
Materializing the principle of partnerships for development, the new generation of Strategic Cooperation Programmes (SCP) is based on inclusive and participatory processes, clearly oriented towards results-based management, in line with the priorities identified by partner countries and the added value of Portugal, respecting the lead partner and strengthening the principles of ownership and mutual accountability. This new generation of SCP also calls for an alignment with the SDGs through a mapping by sector of activity SCP-SDG that will allow Portugal and its partner countries a more detailed monitoring of the contribution of their activities for the implementation of the SDGs. So far, we have signed new SCPs with of S\0x201Eo Tom\0xC8 and Pr\0xCCncipe (2016-2020) and Cape Verde (2017-2021), and we are currently negotiating with Angola and Mozambique, with an expectation of conclusion by the end of 2017, and will launch a new programming cycle with East Timor. 
Recognizing the indisputable role that the private sector can play in developing countries, particularly LDCs, by promoting the diversification of the economic activity and job creation, Portugal attaches the highest priority to the creation of incentives for their involvement in the process of sustainable development. For this reason, we have sought to promote a more efficient use of the ODA resources as a tool for the leverage of other flows for development, for example through blending mechanisms, or through its participation in the financing and implementation of development projects and scholarships, as well as on promoting a favourable environment 
	for the private sector in developing countries. 	82 
The allocation of scholarships is a relevant part of the new paradigm of Portuguese cooperation policy, as a priority tool for human and institutional capacity building and of major importance for partner countries. This new paradigm calls for a particular focus in vital areas to those countries, like education, as well as diversification of sources of funding and the involvement of the private sector, in line with the strategic priorities of the Portuguese foreign policy. 
In this sense, we began in 2016 to draft a new Grants Programme that seeks greater involvement between Portuguese companies and national capital and higher education institutions, including universities and polytechnics, NGDOs and foundations in the PALOP countries and East Timor. In short, Portugal has sought to create conditions to promote: i) access to science, technology and innovation, knowledge sharing, in order to promote North-South and South-South cooperation, the development, transfer, deployment and diffusion of environmental technologies to match the reality of their partner countries (Technology); ii) enhancing the response capacity of partner countries in implementing the SDGs (Empowerment); iii) strengthen the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development by supporting the establishment of multi-sector partnerships that mobilize and share knowledge, expertise, technology and financial resources for the pursuit of the SDGs in partner countries and to encourage and promote partnerships between different actors, including publicprivate and other representatives of civil society; and iv) increasing support for the preparation and implementation of measures of progress in sustainable development, through capacity building (statistical data, Monitoring and Accountability). 
In the context of the partnership with civil society, priority is given to dialogue, exchange of information and enhanced participation, support for development cooperation projects and education for development, the promotion of partnerships between different types of actors and the strengthening of technical and operational capacity of civil society. 
The empowerment of civil society organizations (CSOs) and collaboration with them, promoting policy coherence and multi-sector partnerships, are already priorities and aim at creating a favourable environment for development in the partner countries, coupled with a strengthening of responsible citizenship in Portugal. In this sense, several partnerships between CSOs and partner countries, CSOs and the other EU countries, as well as between CSOs and public institutions, foundations, universities, municipalities and the private sector, have been encouraged and supported. 
Multistakeholder partnerships are an important element in the promotion of a collaborative change that requires participatory and inclusive dialogue. To this end, it has been a priority to develop coordination mechanisms and consultations with civil society actors and the private sector in the drafting, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the cooperation policy, in particular within the Cooperation Forum and other consultation structures. 
In this fashion, Portugal will continue to work with several CSOs to create conditions that favour the establishment of partnerships with stakeholders, to implement the 2030 Agenda through the following main lines of action: i) channel, especially for LDCs, the amount available in the framework of co-financing for projects run by NGDOs in developing countries. Between 2002-2015, approximately 90% of the total envelope (40 million euro) went for this group of countries; ii) continue to support projects of cooperation contributing to critical thinking on development options in environments marked by an increasing complexity and interdependence; iii) continue to enhance the capacity of developing countries NGDOs for the implementation of projects and intermediation in the most disadvantaged communities, citizensi participation in public 83 management and follow-up and monitoring of public policies of local and national development from a human rights perspective; and iv) continue to foster capacity building in the establishment and consolidation of multistakeholder partnerships between civil society organisations, local authorities, higher education institutions, private sector and other public institutions via co-financing for NGDOs in developing countries and education for development through support to civil society initiatives aimed at reinforcing the capacity of CSOs and by establishing framework agreements with representative platforms of CSOs and local authorities. 
Portugal has also committed to strengthen cooperation with the EU through cross-sectorial Delegated Cooperation, in countries and regions where the Portuguese Cooperation has a clear added value. Favouring greater coordination and concentration of aid in partner countries or in sectors where the comparative advantage of Portugal better answer their needs, this type of cooperation has allowed the implementation and administration of cooperation programmes of larger impact, while at the same time allowing the EU to meet its commitments as part of its external action and development cooperation policy. Therefore, and even indirectly, it contributes to mobilizing additional financial resources for developing countries from multiple sources, with sufficient volume to create investment opportunities. In this context, it is possible to act in very different sectors which are crucial for the development policies of partner countries, some of the highest political sensitivity (public governance, rule of law, security and defence, public finances, e.g.), and others that require a high degree of multidisciplinary expertise such as climate change, rural development, food security and nutrition or resilience. This shows the confidence which the EU and partner countries have in the experience of Portugal, and its effectiveness, as a mechanism to join forces and leverage resources. 
In parallel, partnerships have been developed with the private sector, academia and the civil society, through the Cam\0x0131es IP participation in consortia for International Technical Assistance, which value: i) the strategic interest of improving Portugalis external action, in particular with the PALOP and Timor-Leste but also creating opportunities for partnership with the Mediterranean countries, Latin America, West Africa and Asia; ii) the development and creation of a market for development; iii) the diversification of funding sources; iv) in terms of the experience gained in competitive environments, along the lines of other agencies of cooperation, and in addition to the delegated cooperation; and v) the integration into national and international partnerships. 
Portugal attaches great importance to intensifying Trilateral Cooperation as a way to promote a pooling of resources, knowledge and sharing of experiences. For this reason, it has been strongly committed to promoting the international debate on this topic together with OECD and other multilateral partners, as well as Triangular Cooperation programmes with Argentina, Chile, Uruguay and Brazil under the Memoranda of Understanding signed with the cooperation agencies of these countries, that aim to promote sustainable economic, social and environmental development in partner countries, in line with the SDGs. Portugal joined the Voluntary Initiative on \0xECPromotion of Effectiveness of the Trilateral Cooperation, launched at the Ministerial meeting of the Global Partnership for Development Cooperation of October 2016, and will continue to work with the OECD and other partners in promoting debate and partnership in this form of cooperation. 
Implementing the principles of the 2030 Agenda in establishing new partnerships and promoting diversification of forms of action, Portugal is also negotiating institutional collaboration protocols of cooperation with European partners, with a view to developing joint actions which make it possible to combine efforts and resources and thereby reinforcing their operational capacity. 
At the multilateral level, Portugal has contributed to an alignment of agendas and actions of the main multilateral fora with the SDGs, in particular in the framework of the United Nations and the European Union. On this last point, we would stress Portugalis commitment to promote the revision of European priorities: i) on 84 the next steps for a sustainable European future; ii) the revision of the European Consensus on Development; and iii) the renewed partnership with African, Caribbean and Pacific States, post-Cotonou Partnership Agreement, due to expire in 2020. In the framework of the CPLP and the Ibero-American Conference, we will continue to strive for an alignment of cooperation activities with the SDGs, with focus on the development of an Indicative Programme of Cooperation-CPLP that meets the challenges set by the SDGs, as well as support for projects that contribute to their achievement. 
Portugal attaches great importance to the strengthening of statistical capacities and methodologies to better monitor and measure progress in implementation and the resources allocated to support the implementation of SDGs. For this reason, it has been working in collaboration with the National Statistical Institutes of the CPLP countries for the preparation of a capacity building programme for the definition of indicators and monitoring of the SDGs in those countries, and has been particularly active in the development of a new statistical measure for Total Official Support for Sustainable Development (TOSSD), complementary to ODA, to have a comprehensive overview of the efforts to achieve sustainable development. Portugal has been one of the main supporters of the importance of involving the participation of different actors (UN, partner countries, civil society) in shaping the TOSSD, in a way as universal and inclusive as possible, which serves the needs of monitoring and reporting of both traditional donors and emerging donors and partner countries. In addition, the development of the Integrated Information System of the Portuguese Cooperation aims to strengthen differentiated national preparedness, given the changes in the arena of international financing for development and the requirements of the 2030 Agenda. 
Through the implementation of cooperation and technical assistance programmes in the area of tax collection and other sources of revenue, Portugal has been supporting the reform of fiscal systems in developing countries, strengthening the capacity of the beneficiary, through transfer of experience and technical expertise. Portugal has also supported international initiatives to combat the erosion of the tax base and profit shifting, and improved administrative cooperation to prevent and combat international tax evasion and avoidance. 
Portugal is also compromised with the debt sustainability of developing countries, currently processing two debt cancellation programmes with two of its main cooperation partners and remains vigilant to other partneris over-indebtedness. 
Recognizing the importance of Policy Coherence for Development (PCD) in the promotion of SDGs, Portugal already has achieved the legal and institutional milestones needed to promote PCD, and granted the necessary political support, involving all government and civil society, which places the country at the forefront in this context. In this context, a National Plan for Policy Coherence for Development, aligned with the national priorities for the SDGs, will intensify joint work with the various Ministries, the national parliament, and our Representations in third countries. 
On the other hand, a special focus has been placed in refinancing and restructuring the national Society for Financing for Development (SOFID), in order to continue to play a more important role in supporting investment in partner countries, in partnership with other European and multilateral financial institutions. The supported actions are from sectors that generate economic and social development (non-speculative) and encompass considerations of a social and environmental nature, working in complementarity with commercial banks using, to this end, a wide variety of financial instruments to mobilize additional resources, namely in conjunction with the private sector. 
Finally, we note the consultations made with Multilateral Development Banks directors on negotiation 
                                                                                              85 procedures for capital increases, reconstitution of concessional windows and implementation of more efficient balance solutions, with particular attention to its dynamic role as a source of financial leverage and of enlargement of the tax base in developing countries. 
 