Indicator 14.4.1: Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels
Target 14.4: By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator is defined as the proportion of fish stocks or species that are exploited within the level of Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY). 
This indicator is currently reported at the regional and global level. 
Concepts: 
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has divided the world oceans into 21 statistical areas, and stock assessment is carried out based on these statistical areas. In total, 584 fish stocks and species have been monitored since 1974, with stock assessment information on 441 stock or species. The stock assessment classifies fish stocks into 3 categories: non-fully exploited, fully exploited, and overexploited. The stocks within biologically sustainable levels are those classified as non-fully exploited and fully exploited.  The Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) is the largest yield (or catch) that can be taken from a fish stock over an indefinite period. The aim of this threshold yield is to achieve the maximum productivity of fish resources while maintaining biodiversity and proper functioning of the relevant ecosystems for present and future generations.   When fishing drives down the biomass of a fish stock below the level at which an MSY can be produced, the stock is said to be overexploited. In contrast, the stock is non-fully exploited if its biomass is above the level corresponding to MSY. When population size is maintained at or close to the level that produces MSY, the species is said to be fully exploited, allowing the population to continue to be productive indefinitely. Sustainable fishery management aims to control fishing pressure so that the stock is maintained at the most productive level.   The biomass of a fish stock is the quantity, usually by weight, of a stock at a given time. Whether a fish stock or species is overexploited is judged based on the estimate of current stock biomass relative to its virgin stock level. This information can only be obtained through stock assessment, although some alternative methods haven recently been developed for the use in fisheries that have no adequate data available. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
This indicator provides a means of monitoring progress and changes in the exploitation and management of global fishery resources as a direct measure of sustainability. It is an important reference for policy formulation and decision making related to sustainable management of fishery resources.   The United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, the United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement, the Plan of Implementation of the 2002 World Summit on Sustainable Development, the strategic goal of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) in 2010, among others, all refer to the MSY-based reference points and targets. Many countries, including Australia, New Zealand and the United States, and the European Union set their management targets based on MSY.  The indicator is currently estimated at regional and global levels due to data limits and other issues, the principles and methodologies behind the assessment are equally applicable at national level. Countries that have sufficient data and capacity should endeavour to estimate this indicator because it directly measures fish resources’ sustainability that is the most fundamental information for national policy and management strategy specific to fish stocks and fishing areas relevant to each country.
Data Sources and Collection Method
All United Nations member countries are asked to report their annual landings by fish species or species group to FAO. The Handbook of Fishery Statistical Standards provides comprehensive definitions of concepts and details of standard classifications applied by the international agencies. The Handbook does not attempt to include details of national systems, many of which were developed for specific national purposes and thus differ from systems used internationally. Nevertheless, authorities considering introducing or revising national statistical systems are encouraged to ensure that the system developed incorporates a high degree of compatibility with the international standards described in the Handbook.   To ensure data quality, each collection is documented to highlight definitions and to specify the structure, sources, coverage, processes, intended use, etc.   Formal stock assessment requires time series of both catch and effort data, together with other biological parameters. Catch means biomass of a fish species that was caught or landed. Fishing effort is a measure of fishing intensity, usually measured as the number of fishing vessels multiplied by time spent fishing. Although FAO collects statistics on the numbers of fishermen and fishing vessels in different categories, no fishing effort data have been collected.   The FAO database covers only official statistics provided by member countries. Regional scientific committees and management bodies are other important sources of fisheries data. However, their significance in data collection varies from commission to commission. For example, a number of tuna commissions have their own data collection system.
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
This indicator is calculated as the number of fish species with a stock assessment of non-fully exploited or fully exploited divided by the total number of fish species with a stock assessment and multiplied by 100. 
Comments and limitations:
The derivation of this indicator is not only data demanding, but also technically intensive as stock assessment is a numerical modelling of fish population dynamics based on time series data of catch and fishing effort as well as other biological parameters and fishery independent data. This is the reason why many countries do not have sufficient data and capacity to produce this indicator. 
The proportion is calculated based on stock numbers, without weighting either by its production volume or stock abundance. This means that every fish stock is considered of the same importance. 
Data quality varies from country to country. In some countries, there is no specific system or network for collecting statistical data on fish catches and other fishery data. Fishery landings data are often reported by national governments in aggregated form rather than by fish species. Many fish stocks do not have adequate data to support formal stock assessment. In such cases FAO evaluates their stock status using simple ad hoc methods that are less data-demanding, but this introduces greater uncertainty. Fishing has a major influence on the abundance of fish populations. However, it is widely recognised that other factors, such as environmental changes, coastal development, climatic change, predator-prey interaction and habitat modification also play an important role. 
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators: N/A
Data Disaggregation
At the international level, the indicator can be calculated separately for each FAO statistical area as well as being presented globally. In addition, for specific fish species or groups it is useful to show the degree of exploitation, as an aid to determining policy on which species need particular attention.
Indicator 14.5.1: Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas
Target 14.5: By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information
Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator measures the average proportion of each marine Key Biodiversity Area that has been designated as a protected area. 
Concepts:
Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) are sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity and are identified following globally standard criteria for the identification of KBAs (IUCN 2016) applied at national levels. 
Marine areas, also known as territorial seas, are defined by the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea as belts of coastal waters extending at most twelve nautical miles from the baseline (usually the mean low-water mark) of a coastal state. 
Protected areas are clearly defined geographical spaces, recognized, dedicated and managed, through legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term conservation of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values. 
The status "designated" is attributed to a protected area when the corresponding authority, according to national legislation or common practice (e.g., by means of an executive decree or the like), officially endorses a document of designation. The designation must be made for biodiversity conservation, not de facto protection arising because of some other activity (e.g., military). 
Marine KBAs are defined as those with at least 5% of their area overlapping the sea, as defined through a spatial analysis. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
The safeguard of important sites is vital for stemming the decline in biodiversity and ensuring long term and sustainable use of marine natural resources. The establishment of protected areas is an important mechanism for achieving this aim, and this indicator serves as a means of measuring progress toward the conservation, restoration and sustainable use of marine ecosystems and their services, in line with obligations under international agreements. Importantly, while it can be disaggregated to report on any given single ecosystem of interest, it is not restricted to any single ecosystem type. 
This indicator adds meaningful information to, complements, and builds from traditionally reported simple statistics of marine area covered by protected areas, computed by dividing the total protected area within a country by the total territorial area of the country and multiplying by 100 (e.g., Chape et al. 2005). It provides a useful measure of whether protected areas are located to cover areas of particular importance for biodiversity.
Data Sources and Collection Method
Protected area data are available through the administrative records of ministries of environment and other ministries responsible for the designation and maintenance of protected areas. Protected Areas data for sites designated under the Ramsar Convention and the UNESCO World Heritage Convention are collected through the relevant convention international secretariats. Protected area data are also aggregated globally into the World Database on Protected Areas by the UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre, according to the mandate for production of the United Nations List of Protected Areas (Deguignet et al. 2014). They are disseminated through Protected Planet, which is jointly managed by UNEP-WCMC and IUCN and its World Commission on Protected Areas (UNEP-WCMC 2016).
KBAs are identified at national scales through multi-stakeholder processes, following standard criteria and thresholds. KBAs data are aggregated into the World Database on Key Biodiversity Areas and managed by BirdLife International on behalf of the KBA Partnership.
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
This indicator is calculated from data derived from a spatial overlap between digital polygons, using Geographic Information Systems (GIS), for protected areas from the World Database on Protected Areas (WDPA - available at www.protectedplanet.net) and digital polygons for marine KBAs (from the World Database of Key Biodiversity Areas, including Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas, Alliance for Zero Extinction sites, and other KBAs; available at www.keybiodiversityareas.org). 
The value of the indicator at time t is calculated as the proportion of each marine KBA covered by protected areas at time t, averaged across all KBAs, as shown in the formula below: 
￼
The UN List of Protected Areas is produced every 5-10 years, and, in the intervening period between compilations of the UN Lists, the WDPA is continually updated as new data become available and released monthly. Based on the latest version of the WDPA, the annual value of the indicator is computed as the mean percentage of each KBA that is covered by protected areas for that year. 
The coverage of each KBA by protected areas is calculated using all the nationally designated protected areas recorded in WDPA whose location and extent is known. Protected areas with unknown location and/or extent are excluded from the data compilation. Where no new data are received for a country/territory during a year, protected area coverage is assumed to be equal to the previous year. 
Comments and limitations:
The indicator does not measure the effectiveness of protected areas in reducing biodiversity loss, which ultimately depends on a range of management and enforcement factors not covered by the indicator. 
Future developments of the indicator will include:
(1)    An expansion of the taxonomic coverage of marine Key Biodiversity Areas through application of the Key Biodiversity Areas standard (IUCN 2016) to a wide variety of marine vertebrates, invertebrates, plants and ecosystem type;
(2)    Improvements in the data on protected areas by continuing to increase the proportion of sites with documented dates of designation and with digitised boundary polygons (rather than coordinates); and
(3)    Further exploration of other methods for assessing and presenting temporal trends in protected area coverage. 
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators: N/A
Data Disaggregation
These data can be disaggregated at national and regional scales.
SDG 14: Oceans 
The worlds oceans  their temperature, chemistry, currents and life  drive global systems that make the Earth habitable for humankind. Our rainwater, drinking water, weather, climate, coastlines, much of our food, and even the oxygen in the air we breathe, are all ultimately provided and regulated by the sea. Throughout history, oceans and seas have been vital conduits for trade and transportation.

Careful management of this essential global resource is a key feature of a sustainable future. However, at the current time, there is a continuous deterioration of coastal waters owing to pollution and ocean acidification is having an adversarial effect on the functioning of ecosystems and biodiversity. This is also negatively impacting small scale fisheries.

Marine protected areas need to be effectively managed and well-resourced and regulations need to be put in place to reduce overfishing, marine pollution and ocean acidification.
Oceans cover three quarters of the Earths surface, contain 97 per cent of the Earths water, and represent 99 per cent of the living space on the planet by volume.
Over three billion people depend on marine and coastal biodiversity for their livelihoods.
Globally, the market value of marine and coastal resources and industries is estimated at $3 trillion per year or about 5 per cent of global GDP.
Oceans contain nearly 200,000 identified species, but actual numbers may lie in the millions.
Oceans absorb about 30 per cent of carbon dioxide produced by humans, buffering the impacts of global warming.
Oceans serve as the worlds largest source of protein, with more than 3 billion people depending on the oceans as their primary source of protein
Marine fisheries directly or indirectly employ over 200 million people.
Subsidies for fishing are contributing to the rapid depletion of many fish species and are preventing efforts to save and restore global fisheries and related jobs, causing ocean fisheries to generate US$50 billion less per year than they could.
Open Ocean sites show current levels of acidity have increased by 26 per cent since the start of the Industrial Revolution.
Coastal waters are deteriorating due to pollution and eutrophication. Without concerted efforts, coastal eutrophication is expected to increase in 20 percent of large marine ecosystems by 2050.
Goal 14 targets

By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution
By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans
Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels
By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics
By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information
By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation increase the economic benefits to Small Island developing States and least developed countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture and tourism
Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity and transfer marine technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries, in particular small island developing States and least developed countries
Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets
Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by implementing international law as reflected in UNCLOS, which provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of The Future We Want

                    Over 3 billion people depend on marine and coastal biodiversity for their livelihood
LIFE BELOW WATER
To conserve and sustainably use the worlds oceans, seas and marine resources.
Oceans provide key natural resources including food, medicines, biofuels and other products. They help with the breakdown and removal of waste and pollution, and their coastal ecosystems act as buffers to reduce damage from storms. Maintaining healthy oceans supports climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts. And have you been to the seaside? Its also a great place for tourism and recreation.
Even more, Marine Protected Areas contribute to poverty reduction by increasing fish catches and income, and improving health. They also help improve gender equality, as women do much of the work at small-scale fisheries.
The marine environment is also home to a stunning variety of beautiful creatures, ranging from single-celled organisms to the biggest animal ever to have lived on the Earththe blue whale. They are also home to coral reefs, one of the most diverse ecosystems on the planet.

Increasing levels of debris in the worlds oceans are having a major environmental and economic impact. Marine debris impacts biodiversity through entanglement or ingestion of debris items by organisms, which can kill them or make it impossible for them to reproduce.
As far as the worlds coral reefs are concerned, about 20 per cent of them have been effectively destroyed and show no prospects for recovery. About 24 per cent of the remaining reefs are under imminent risk of collapse through human pressures, and a further 26 per cent are under a longer -term threat of collapse.
Furthermore, improper marine management results in overfishing.
The lost economic benefits from the fisheries sector are estimated to be around US$50 billion annually. The UN Environment Programme estimates the cumulative economic impact of poor ocean management practices is at least US$200 billion per year. In the absence of mitigation measures, climate change will increase the cost of damage to the ocean by an additional US$322 billion per year by 2050.
The costs of taking action largely are offset by the long-term gains. In economic terms, the Convention on Biological Diversity suggests that scaled up actions to sustain the global ocean require a US$32 billion one-time public cost and US$21 billion dollars a year for recurring costs.
For open ocean and deep sea areas, sustainability can be achieved only through increased international cooperation to protect vulnerable habitats. Establishing comprehensive, effective and equitably managed systems of government-protected areas should be pursued to conserve biodiversity and ensure a sustainable future for the fishing industry.
On a local level, we should make ocean-friendly choices when buying products or eating food derived from oceans and consume only what we need. Selecting certified products is a good place to start.
Making small changes in our daily lives, like taking public transport and unplugging electronics saves energy. These actions reduce our carbon footprint, a factor that contributes to rising sea levels.
We should eliminate plastic usage as much as possible and organize beach clean-ups.
Most importantly, we can spread the message about how important marine life is and why we need to protect it.
                                           

Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Oceans, along with coastal and marine resources, play an essential role in human well-being and social and economic development worldwide. They are particularly crucial for people living in coastal communities, who represented 37 per cent of the global population in 2010. Oceans provide livelihoods and tourism benefits, as well as subsistence and income. They also help regulate the global ecosystem by absorbing heat and carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and protecting coastal areas from flooding and erosion. In fact, coastal and marine resources contribute an estimated $28 trillion to the global economy each year through ecosystem services. However, those resources are extremely vulnerable to environmental degradation, overfishing, climate change and pollution. The sustainable use and preservation of marine and coastal ecosystems and their biological diversity is essential to achieving the 2030 Agenda, in particular for small island developing States. Pollution of both land and seas is a threat in many coastal regions. In addition, since river basins, marine ecosystems and the atmosphere are all part of hydrological systems, the effects of such pollution are often felt far from their source. In many coastal communities, pollution and eutrophication, which is the presence of excessive nutrients in water, frequently owing to runoff from the land, causing dense plant growth and the death of animal life, are driving detrimental changes. The five large marine ecosystems most at risk from coastal eutrophication, according to a global comparative assessment undertaken in 2016 as part of the Transboundary Water Assessment Programme, are the Bay of Bengal, the East China Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, the North Brazil Shelf and the South China Sea. Since the beginning of the industrial revolution, the ocean has absorbed about one third of the carbon dioxide released by human activities, thereby mitigating the full impact of climate change. However, this comes at a steep ecological price, as dissolved carbon dioxide in seawater lowers the pH level of oceans, thereby increasing acidity and changing the biogeochemical carbonate balance. Concerns about ocean acidification, first expressed in the early 1980s, have now been confirmed, and the extent of its impact on marine ecosystems is being investigated. Fisheries contribute significantly to global food security, livelihoods and the economy. However, if not sustainably managed, fishing can damage fish habitats. Ultimately, overfishing impairs the functioning of ecosystems and reduces biodiversity, with negative repercussions for sustainable social and economic development. In order to achieve a healthy balance, fish stocks must be maintained within biologically sustainable limits, at or above the abundance level that can produce maximum sustainable yields. Based on an analysis of assessed stocks, the percentage of world marine fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels declined from 90 per cent in 1974 to 69 per cent in 2013. Fortunately, the downward trend has slowed and appears to have stabilized since 2008. Biodiverse marine sites require safeguarding to ensure sustainable long-term use of their precious natural resources. Globally, in 2014, 8.4 per cent of the marine environment under national jurisdiction (up to 200 nautical miles from shore) and 0.25 per cent of the marine environment beyond national jurisdiction were under protection. From 2000 to 2016, the share of marine sites around the world that are designated as key biodiversity areas and are completely covered by protected areas increased from 15 per cent to 19 per cent. 
Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development 


18.	The increasingly adverse impacts of climate change (including ocean acidification), overfishing and marine pollution are jeopardizing recent gains in protecting portions of the worlds oceans. 
		Global trends point to continued deterioration of coastal waters owing to pollution and eutrophication (excessive nutrients in water, frequently a result of run-off from land, which causes dense plant growth and the death of animal life from lack of oxygen). Of the 63 large marine ecosystems evaluated under the Transboundary Waters Assessment Programme, 16 per cent of the ecosystems are in the high or highest risk categories for coastal eutrophication. They are located mainly in Western Europe, Southern and Eastern Asia, and the Gulf of Mexico.
		Ocean acidification is closely linked to shifts in the carbonate chemistry of the waters, which can lead to a significant weakening of the shells and skeletons of many marine species (such as reef-building corals and shelled molluscs). Studies of marine acidity at open ocean and coastal sites around the world have indicated that current levels are often outside preindustrial bounds. 
		Overfishing reduces food production, impairs the functioning of ecosystems and reduces biodiversity. The proportion of world marine fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels has declined from 90 per cent in 1974 to 68.6 per cent in 2013. However, the trend has slowed and appears to have stabilized from 2008 to 2013. 
		Small-scale fisheries face numerous challenges. In response, about 70 per cent of the respondents to a survey representing 92 countries and the European Union have introduced or developed regulations, policies, laws, plans or strategies specifically targeting small-scale fisheries. 
		When effectively managed and well resourced, marine protected areas are important mechanisms for safeguarding ocean life. In 2017, protected areas cover 13.2 per cent of the marine environment under national jurisdiction (up to 200 nautical miles from shore), 0.25 per cent of the marine environment beyond national jurisdiction and 5.3 per cent of the total global ocean area.
		Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development
Ocean conservation and the sustainable use of oceans continue to require effective strategies and management to combat the adverse effects of overfished stocks, increasing ocean acidification and coastal eutrophication. In addition, increases in the extent of protected areas for marine biodiversity and intensification of research capacity and ocean science funding remain critically important to the preservation of marine resources.Fishery resources are extremely vulnerable to environmental degradation, climate change and overfishing. The proportion of world marine fish stocks that is within biologically sustainable levels declined from 90 per cent in 1974 to 69 per cent in 2013.Marine protected areas are known mechanisms for ensuring the conservation of the ocean. As at January 2018, 16 per cent (or over 22 million km2) of marine waters under national jurisdiction (that is, 0 to 200 nautical miles from shore) were covered by protected areas, more than doubling in extent since 2010. Protection of marine key biodiversity areas has also increased, with the mean coverage now 44 per cent compared with 30 per cent in 2000.Scientific knowledge and related research capacity are essential to underpin the sustainable management of the ocean and its resources. In an assessment in the Global Ocean Science Report, the responses from 26 countries from all regions of the world for 20092013 were analysed, and it was found that government funding for ocean science only ranges from <0.04 per cent to 4 per cent of national research and development funding.
Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable development	
14.1 By 2025, prevent and significantly reduce marine pollution of all kinds, in particular from land-based activities, including marine debris and nutrient pollution	14.1.1 Index of coastal eutrophication and floating plastic debris density
14.2 By 2020, sustainably manage and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse impacts, including by strengthening their resilience, and take action for their restoration in order to achieve healthy and productive oceans	14.2.1 Proportion of national exclusive economic zones managed using ecosystem-based approaches
14.3 Minimize and address the impacts of ocean acidification, including through enhanced scientific cooperation at all levels	14.3.1 Average marine acidity (pH) measured at agreed suite of representative sampling stations
14.4 By 2020, effectively regulate harvesting and end overfishing, illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and destructive fishing practices and implement science-based management plans, in order to restore fish stocks in the shortest time feasible, at least to levels that can produce maximum sustainable yield as determined by their biological characteristics	14.4.1 Proportion of fish stocks within biologically sustainable levels
14.5 By 2020, conserve at least 10 per cent of coastal and marine areas, consistent with national and international law and based on the best available scientific information	14.5.1 Coverage of protected areas in relation to marine areas
14.6 By 2020, prohibit certain forms of fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation3	14.6.1 Progress by countries in the degree of implementation of international instruments aiming to combat illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing
14.7 By 2030, increase the economic benefits to small island developing States and least developed countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture and tourism	14.7.1 Sustainable fisheries as a proportion of GDP in small island developing States, least developed countries and all countries
14.a Increase scientific knowledge, develop research capacity and transfer marine technology, taking into account the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission Criteria and Guidelines on the Transfer of Marine Technology, in order to improve ocean health and to enhance the contribution of marine biodiversity to the development of developing countries, in particular small island developing States and least developed countries	14.a.1 Proportion of total research budget allocated to research in the field of marine technology
14.b Provide access for small-scale artisanal fishers to marine resources and markets	14.b.1 Progress by countries in the degree of application of a legal/regulatory/policy/institutional framework which recognizes and protects access rights for small-scale fisheries
14.c Enhance the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources by implementing international law as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, which provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources, as recalled in paragraph 158 of “The future we want”	14.c.1 Number of countries making progress in ratifying, accepting and implementing through legal, policy and institutional frameworks, ocean-related instruments that implement international law, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, for the conservation and sustainable use of the oceans and their resources
