Indicator 11.5.1: Number of deaths, missing persons and directly affected persons attributed to disasters per 100,000 population
Target 11.5: By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator measures the number of people who died, went missing or were directly affected by disasters per 100,000 population. 
Concepts:
Death: The number of people who died during the disaster, or directly after, as a direct result of the hazardous event.
Missing: The number of people whose whereabouts is unknown since the hazardous event. It includes people who are presumed dead, for whom there is no physical evidence such as a body, and for which an official/legal report has been filed with competent authorities.
Directly affected:  The number of people who have suffered injury, illness or other health effects; who were evacuated, displaced, relocated or have suffered direct damage to their livelihoods, economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets. Indirectly affected are people who have suffered consequences, other than or in addition to direct effects, over time, due to disruption or changes in economy, critical infrastructure, basic services, commerce or work, or social, health and psychological consequences. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 was adopted by UN Member States in March 2015 as a global policy of disaster risk reduction. Among the global targets, “Target A: Substantially reduce global disaster mortality by 2030, aiming to lower average per 100,000 global mortality between 2020-2030 compared with 2005-2015” and “Target B: Substantially reduce the number of affected people globally by 2030, aiming to lower the average global figure per 100,000 between 2020-2030 compared with 2005-2015” will contribute to sustainable development and strengthen economic, social, health and environmental resilience. The economic, environmental and social perspectives would include poverty eradication, urban resilience, and climate change adaptation. 
The open-ended intergovernmental expert working group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction (OIEWG) established by the General Assembly (resolution 69/284) has developed a set of indicators to measure global progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework, which was endorsed by the UNGA (OIEWG report A/71/644). The relevant global indicators for the Sendai Framework will be used to report for this indicator. 
Disaster loss data is greatly influenced by large-scale catastrophic events, which represent important outliers. UNISDR recommends countries report the data by event, so that complementary analysis can be undertaken to obtain trends and patterns in which such catastrophic events (that can represent outliers) can be included or excluded.
Data Sources and Collection Method
Data provider at national level is appointed Sendai Framework Focal Points. In most countries disaster data are collected by line ministries and national disaster loss databases are established and managed by special purpose agencies including national disaster management agencies, civil protection agencies, and meteorological agencies. The Sendai Framework Focal Points in each country are responsible of data reporting through the Sendai Framework Monitoring System.
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
This indicator, X, is calculated as a simple summation of related indicators (death, missing people, and affected people) from national disaster loss databases divided by the national population data (from national censuses, World Bank or UN Statistical Commission information). 
￼
Where:
A2  Number of deaths attributed to disasters;
A3 Number of missing persons attributed to disasters; and
B1 Number of directly affected people attributed to disasters.
* Detailed methodologies can be found in the Technical Guidance (see below the Reference section)
Comments and limitations:
The Sendai Framework Monitoring System has been developed to measure the progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework by UNGA endorsed indicators. Member States will be able to report through the System from March 2018. The data for SDG indicators will be compiled and reported by UNISDR.
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators:
In most cases international data sources only record events that surpass some threshold of impact and use secondary data sources which usually have non uniform or even inconsistent methodologies, producing heterogeneous datasets.
Data Disaggregation
This indicator can be disaggregated by number of deaths attributed to disasters; number of missing persons attributed to disasters; and number of directly affected people attributed to disasters. Possible desirable disaggregation dimensions include: hazard, geography (administrative unit), sex, age (3 categories), disability and income. 
Indicator 11.5.2: Direct economic loss in relation to global GDP, damage to critical infrastructure and number of disruptions to basic services, attributed to disasters
Target 11.5: By 2030, significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator measures the ratio of direct economic loss attributed to disasters in relation to GDP, damage to critical infrastructure and number of disruptions to basic services, attributed to disasters. 
This indicator has 3 components and they are described below. 
Concepts:
	•	Direct economic loss: the monetary value of total or partial destruction of physical assets existing in the affected area. Direct economic loss is nearly equivalent to physical damage.
*Annotations: Examples of physical assets that are the basis for calculating direct economic loss include homes, schools, hospitals, commercial and governmental buildings, transport, energy, telecommunications infrastructures and other infrastructure; business assets and industrial plants; and production such as crops, livestock and production infrastructure. They may also encompass environmental assets and cultural heritage. Direct economic losses usually happen during the event or within the first few hours after the event and are often assessed soon after the event to estimate recovery cost and claim insurance payments. These are tangible and relatively easy to measure.
	•	Critical infrastructure: The physical structures, facilities, networks and other assets which provide services that are essential to the social and economic functioning of a community or society.
	•	Basic services: Services that are needed for all of society to function appropriately.
*Annotation: Examples of basic services include water supply, sanitation, health care and education. They also include services provided by critical infrastructure such as electricity, telecommunications, transport or waste management that are needed for all of society to function.
For this indicator, disruption, interruption or lower quality of basic services is proposed to be measured for at least the following public services: Healthcare facilities, Educational facilities, Power/energy and other utility system, Transport system. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 was adopted by UN Member States in March 2015 as a global policy of disaster risk reduction. Among the global targets, “Target C: Reduce direct disaster economic loss in relation to global gross domestic product (GDP) by 2030” will contribute to sustainable development and strengthen economic, social, health and environmental resilience. The economic, environmental and social perspectives would include poverty eradication, urban resilience, and climate change adaptation.
The open-ended intergovernmental expert working group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction (OIEWG) established by the General Assembly (resolution 69/284) has developed a set of indicators to measure global progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework, which was endorsed by the UNGA (OIEWG report A/71/644). The relevant global indicators for the Sendai Framework will be used to report for this indicator. 
Disaster loss data is greatly influenced by large-scale catastrophic events, which represent important outliers. UNISDR recommends countries report the data by event, so that complementary analysis can be undertaken to obtain trends and patterns in which such catastrophic events (that can represent outliers in terms of damage) can be included or excluded.
Data Sources and Collection Method
Data providers at national level are appointed Sendai Framework Focal Points. In most countries disaster data are collected by line ministries and national disaster loss databases are established and managed by special purpose agencies including national disaster management agencies, civil protection agencies, and meteorological agencies. The Sendai Framework Focal Points in each country are responsible of data reporting through the online Sendai Framework Monitoring System.
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
This indicator has three datasets:
1)        Direct economic loss in relation to global GDP,
2)       damage to critical infrastructure, and
3)       number of disruptions to basic services. 
Detailed methodologies can be found in the Technical Guidance (see the Reference 2)
A short summary:
The original national disaster loss databases usually register physical damage value (housing unit loss, infrastructure loss etc.), which is reported to 2), while monetary value for 1) needs conversion according to a standardized methodology, either provided nationally or described in the Technical Guidance. For 3) “disruption” includes:  interruptions, either single or multiple, short or long, of the services; or a measurable/noticeable reduction in the quality of the service; or reduction in the service coverage; or a combination of the above situations. Countries are required to separately report by facilities according to the sub-indicators, and maintain their methodologies consistent over the reporting period. 
1) Direct economic loss in relation to global GDP:
For complete information on this sub-indicator please refer to Indicator: 1.5.2
These sub-indicators include global indicators for the Sendai Framework;
C-2: Direct agricultural loss attributed to disasters.
Agriculture is understood to include the crops, livestock, fisheries, apiculture, aquaculture and forest sectors as well as associated facilities and infrastructure.
C-3: Direct economic loss to all other damaged or destroyed productive assets attributed to disasters.
Productive assets would be disaggregated by economic sector, including services, according to standard international classifications. Countries would report against those economic sectors relevant to their economies. This would be described in the associated metadata.
C-4: Direct economic loss in the housing sector attributed to disasters.
Data would be disaggregated according to damaged and destroyed dwellings.
C-5: Direct economic loss resulting from damaged or destroyed critical infrastructure attributed to disasters.
The decision regarding those elements of critical infrastructure to be included in the calculation will be left to the Member States and described in the accompanying metadata. Protective infrastructure and green infrastructure should be included where relevantC-6: Direct economic loss to cultural heritage damaged or destroyed attributed to disasters. 
2) damage to critical infrastructure
D-2: Number of destroyed or damaged health facilities attributed to disasters.
D-3: Number of destroyed or damaged educational facilities attributed to disasters.
D-4: Number of other destroyed or damaged critical infrastructure units and facilities attributed to disasters.
The decision regarding those elements of critical infrastructure to be included in the calculation will be left to the Member States and described in the accompanying metadata. Protective infrastructure and green infrastructure should be included where relevant.  
3) number of disruptions to basic services
D-6: Number of disruptions to educational services attributed to disasters.
D-7: Number of disruptions to health services attributed to disasters.
D-8: Number of disruptions to other basic services attributed to disasters.
The decision regarding those elements of basic services to be included in the calculation will be left to the Member States and described in the accompanying metadata.  
Comments and limitations:
The Sendai Framework Monitoring System has been developed to measure the progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework by UNGA endorsed indicators. Member States are to report through the System from March 2018. The data for SDG indicators are compiled and reported by UNISDR. 
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators:
While the data obtained therough the Sendai Framework Monitor has no thresholds,  most international data sources only record events that surpass some threshold of impact and use secondary data sources which usually have non uniform or even inconsistent methodologies, producing heterogeneous datasets.
Data Disaggregation
This indicator is required to be disaggregated by:
Direct agricultural loss attributed to disasters;
Direct economic loss to all other damaged or destroyed productive assets attributed to disasters;
Direct economic loss in the housing sector attributed to disasters;
Direct economic loss resulting from damaged or destroyed critical infrastructure attributed to disasters;
Direct economic loss to cultural heritage damaged or destroyed attributed to disasters;
Number of destroyed or damaged health facilities attributed to disasters;
Number of destroyed or damaged educational facilities attributed to disasters;
Number of other destroyed or damaged critical infrastructure units and facilities attributed to disasters;
Number of disruptions to educational services attributed to disasters;
Number of disruptions to health services attributed to disasters; and
Number of disruptions to other basic services attributed to disasters. 
It can be also disaggregated as follows.
Hazard
Geography (Administrative Unit)
C-2: type of crops, livestock lost, and other agricultural sectors
C-3:  level of affectation (damaged/destroyed), and type and size of Facility (types according to ISIC classification and size in categories such as small/medium/large.)
C-4: house location (such as rural/urban). Optionally by size (small/medium/large), and material (wood, cardboard, masonry, etc.) 
C-5: level of affectation (damaged/destroyed), and type and size of infrastructure (types according to UNISDR provided classification based on HAZUS, and size in categories such as unpaved/paved/highway or small/medium/large.).
D-2, 3, 4:  level of affectation (damaged/destroyed), and type and size of infrastructure (types according to UNISDR provided classification based on HAZUS, and size in categories such as unpaved/paved/highway or small/medium/large. The disaggregation will be declared in the accompanying metadata)
D-4: infrastructure
D-8:  by type of service as declared in the accompanying metadata
The disaggregation is set up by each country in the accompanying metadata
Indicator 11.6.1: Proportion of urban solid waste regularly collected and with adequate final discharge out of total urban solid waste generated, by cities
Target 11.6: By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator is defined as the proportion of municipal solid waste collected and managed in controlled facilities out of total municipal solid waste generated, by cities. 
Concepts:
Solid Waste is the garbage or refuse generated by households, offices, industries and commercial activities within an urban area. 
Municipal Solid Waste is wastes generated by households, and wastes of a similar nature generated by commercial and industrial premises, by institutions such as schools, hospitals, care homes and prisons, and from public spaces such as streets, markets, slaughter houses, public toilets, bus stops, parks, and gardens. The definition of MSW should follow the local definitions so it is important to annotate the local and national definition(s) of MSW. However, MSW should exclude the mineral waste.  
Total Municipal Solid Waste Generated by the City is the sum of collected municipal solid waste and uncollected municipal solid waste 
Municipal Solid Waste Collected refers to waste that is regularly collected from specific addresses or designated collection points. Collection frequency will depend on local conditions and on any pre-separation of the waste. For example, both mixed waste and organic waste are often collected daily in tropical climates for public health reasons, and generally at least weekly; source separated dry recyclables may be collected less frequently. 
Uncollected Municipal Solid Waste refers to waste generated in a city but uncollected due to the lack of collection services. 
Municipal Solid Waste Managed in Controlled Facilities refers to waste being accepted in a facility that has reached at least an intermediate level of control out of collected municipal solid waste. The level of control for a particular facility can be assessed using qualitative criteria including 1) degree of control over waste reception and general site management; 2) degree of control over waste treatment and disposal and 3) degree of monitoring and verification of environmental control. A score of at least 10 on each criterion is the threshold required to be considered as ‘controlled’. 
International data collection efforts (e.g., UNSD/ United Nations Environment Programme Questionnaire on Environment Statistics-Waste Section) exclude waste from municipal sewage network and treatment, municipal construction and demolition waste from the definition of Municipal Solid Waste.  Possible data collected for this SDG indicator , if allowed for disaggregation by these categories can enable reporting for both the SDG and for other international reporting (e.g., UNSD/ United Nations Environment Programme Questionnaire). 
Comments and Limitations:
Collection of data for the indicator will require training and capacity development for monitoring at both national and local level. The precision of data on total municipal solid waste generation is  disputable. In general, developed countries have solid waste data collection systems but most of the middle and low-income countries do not have data. In these countries and cities, household survey and other complimentary surveys can be conducted for the estimation of municipal waste generation per capita. However, one of the key challenges of data precision in the middle to low income countries is the lack of accurate population data in their jurisdiction, particularly regarding slums, where usually no waste collection service is taking place. The judgement on the level of control of waste management facilities, including composting, recycling, incineration facilities in a city, requires high level of technical capacity and large investment in human resources. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
A sustainable city must collect and appropriately manage all its solid waste in order to improve the standards of living and cleanliness. Integrated solid waste management (ISWM) strategies are also necessary for environmental sustainability and effective resource management.
Data Sources and Collection Method
Municipal Solid Waste Generation Per Capita
For countries and cities that have the data already, data can be collected through municipal record. For countries and cities that do not have the data, a household survey to identify daily waste generation should be done, at least two times a year in different seasons. In the household survey, liner bags will be distributed to each household to be surveyed and ask head of household to put 7 days of waste generated. Then the liner bags are collected and its weight is measured. Household to be surveyed should be picked up according to the income levels. Municipal waste from other sources such as market, restaurants, hotels, schools and so on also should be measured.
Population in the City
Population census
Municipal Solid Waste Managed in a Controlled Facility
Survey on the qualitative judgement of waste treatment and facility as well as daily amount of waste received by the facilities is required. The sheet below can be utilised.
Survey Sheet Example for Recycling and Treatment Facilities
Treatment facility name
Degree of control score
Process employed
Type of waste
Amount of solid waste received
Amount of sewage sludge
Amount of residue
Where residue is exported
 
(1)
 
 
 
 (t)
 
(t)
 
(t)
 
(2)
(3)
 
(1)
 
 
 
 (t)
 
 (t)
 
 (t)
 
(2)
(3)
Survey Sheet Example for Disposal Facilities
Landfill sites name
Landfill type
Operation start year
Degree of control score
Amount of MSW received
Amount of sewage sludge received
 
 
 
(1)
 
 (t)
 
(t)
(2)
(3)
 
 
 
(1)
 
 (t)
 
(t)
(2)
(3)
 
 
Globally, data are already being collected for the related statistics contained in the UNSD/United Nations Environment Programme Questionnaire, and methodological guidance for the statistics is being developed in the methodology sheet on waste statistics of the Manual on the Basic Set of Environment Statistics (https://unstats.un.org/unsd/envstats/fdes/manual_bses.cshtml).
 
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
The indicator is calculated as follows:
￼
Total municipal solid waste generated by the city can be estimated by multiplication of the municipal solid waste generation per capita and population of the city. When the municipal solid waste generation per capita is not available, household survey for a daily waste generation in household and other premises (e.g. restaurants, hotels, hospitals, schools, etc) should be conducted. Since the waste generation can differ according to the seasons, the survey should be conducted at least two times a year to estimate the municipal solid waste generation per capita.
Municipal solid waste managed in controlled facility is estimated through qualitative judgement of the degree of environmental control of facilities where the city’s municipal waste is collected and transported. The judgement of environmental control can be conducted in line with the criteria below. Another important thing is to deduct residue amount from treatment facilities to avoid double count.
(1) Degree of control over waste reception and handling at each site. This criterion should be applied to all treatment and disposal sites, whatever the specific process being used.
Factors affecting the assessment include:
	•	Vehicular access to the site (high level of control: hard surfaced access roads of adequate width and load-bearing capacity, kept clean and free of mud)
	•	 Traffic management (high level of control: any queues for site access kept short in time and contained within the site; little impact of traffic on neighbours).
	•	Site security (high level of control: site fenced; no unauthorised site access; gates locked when site closed).
	•	Waste reception and record keeping (high level of control: reception office; staffed during all opening hours; all vehicles logged and loads checked; weighbridge installed and all weights logged). Note that the procedures for monitoring the records thus collected are assessed under (3).
	•	Waste unloading (high level of control: waste directed to a designated area; unloading supervised by site staff).
	•	Control over nuisance (high level of control: successful control of windblown litter, flies, vermin, birds and of ‘mud’ leaving the site on vehicle tyres)
	•	Control of fires (high level of control: no routine burning of wastes; no ‘wild’ fires; active fire prevention and emergency response systems in place in case of accidental fire)
a. No control                                    
b. Low level of control
c. Medium level of control
d. Medium/High level of control
e. High level of control
0 is scored
5
10
15
20
(2) Degree of control over both the waste treatment and disposal process in use at each site and over any potential emissions.
This criterion covers both the presence of the necessary technologies, and the operating procedures for their proper use.
The nature of controls required will depend on both the process employed and on the potential emissions. As an example, the table below provides guidance on how the general principles can be applied to land disposal and thermal treatment (using the specific example of mass-burn incineration).
For biological treatment, the detail will vary with the type of process (e.g. windrow composting, in-vessel composting, anaerobic digestion). However, in all cases a ‘high level’ of control would imply a high degree of control over: the incoming waste (to avoid hazardous waste or contrary materials); processing temperature to ensure pathogen destruction; retention time in the process; mixing in the process (including turning of windrows); atmospheric emissions including odours and bio aerosols; and leachate collection and treatment.
Similar principles can be applied to other facilities, including mechanical-biological treatment (MBT) plants, advanced thermal treatment and new technologies for valorisation of organic waste in developing countries. In each case, the user may use the following scoring tables as a ‘best judgment’ guideline for scoring.
Where a fuel is being made from waste to be burnt elsewhere, then the assessment should include the process and emission controls at the user facilities.
(3) Degree of monitoring and verification of environmental controls (Includes the existence and regular implementation of: robust environmental permitting/ licensing procedures; regular record keeping, monitoring and verification carried out by the facility itself; AND monitoring, inspection and verification by an independent regulatory body)
The environmental monitoring programme and process control record keeping required will be specific to the type of facility.
	•	All sites must comply with the federal/national/local environmental legislation, have conducted an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) where necessary, have obtained the most recent permit/license and kept it up-to-date.
	•	Permitting processes should be supportive of initiatives that improve environmental performance of the system. A lower score should be assigned if permitting processes for improved facilities have been unduly long and complex, while existing facilities  continued to operate with much lower levels of (or no) environmental control.
	•	For all sites it should include incoming waste volumes, weights and categories; at least occasional monitoring of waste composition and relevant properties; control of ‘nuisance’ (including windblown litter, flies, vermin, birds and ‘mud’ leaving the site on vehicle tyres); and control of odour, site fires, and emission of potential greenhouse gases (particularly methane and nitrous oxides, as well as carbon dioxide).
	•	For all land disposal: ground and surface water.
	•	For engineered and sanitary landfills: leachate and landfill gas management.
	•	For thermal treatment: moisture content and calorific value of incoming wastes; temperature, residence time, emissions to air (including those of nitrogen oxides (NO), sulphur dioxide (SO2), hydrogen chloride (HCl), heavy metals and dioxins), effluent treatment and disposal, and the quantities and management methods of both fly ash and bottom ash.
	•	For biological treatment: input waste controls (to protect both the process and the product quality); process control (temperature, residence time, mixing); product quality control; emissions controls; and greenhouse gas controls (particularly methane and nitrous oxides).
a. No compliance b. Low compliance c. Medium Compliance d. Medium/High compliance e. High compliance
0 is scored 5 10 15 20
 
Level of Control
Score
Land disposal
Thermal treatment
a.
None
0
Uncontrolled dumping – no controls
Uncontrolled burning lacking most ‘control’ functions
b.
Low (Semi-controlled facility)
5
Site staffed; waste placed in designated area; some site equipment
Site staffed; some containment and management of combustion process; basic operating procedures to control nuisance
c.
Medium (Controlled facility)
10
Waste compacted using site equipment; waste covered (at least irregularly)
Emission controls to capture particulates; trained staff follow set operating procedures; equipment properly maintained; ash properly managed
d.
Medium/high (Engineered facility)
15
Engineered landfill site: use daily cover material; some level of leachate containment and treatment; collection of landfill gas
High levels of engineering and process control over residence time, turbulence and temperature; emission controls to capture acid gases and capture dioxins; active management of flyash.
e.
High (State-of-the-art facility)
20
Fully functional sanitary landfill site: properly sited and designed; leachate containment (naturally consolidated clay on the site or constructed liner); leachate & gas collection; gas flaring and/or utilization; final cover; post closure plan
Built to and operating in compliance with international best practice including eg. EU or other similarly stringent stack and GHG emission criteria Flyash managed as a hazardous waste using best appropriate technology.
Data Disaggregation
Data for this indicator can be disaggregated at the city and town levels.
- Disaggregation by population (waste generation per capita)
- Disaggregation by type of facility
- Disaggregation by material type, i.e., by municipal sewage network and treatment, municipal construction and demolition waste and any other
Indicator 11.6.2: Annual mean levels of fine particulate matter (eg. PM 2.5 and PM 10) in cities (population weighted)
Target 11.6: By 2030, reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Definition and Rationale
Definition: 
This indicator is defined as the annual mean of the daily concentrations of fine suspended particles equal or less than 2.5 microns in diameters (PM2.5) in urban areas. 
Particulate matter is an agreed indicator to measure of air pollution. This mean is a population-weighted average, e.g. if several cities measure PM2.5, the country mean will be weighted with the corresponding city population, and is expressed in micrograms per cubic meter ￼. 
To date, particulate matter with a diameter equal or less than 10 microns (PM10) is still more commonly measured than PM2.5 worldwide, although this is evolving (WHO 2016a). To convert PM10 to PM2.5, conversion factors can be used, generally between 0.3-0.8 (WHO, 2014). 
The present reported indicator is modelled for all urban areas in each country by WHO (Shaddick et al, 2016; WHO 2016b) following the methodology described below. 
Concepts:
Particulate matter with a diameter equal or less than 2.5 microns in diameters (PM2.5) is the most commonly used pollutant in epidemiological studies on the health effects due to exposure to air pollution. PM2.5 is a good indicator of complex pollution mixtures and epidemiological findings suggest that it is a major risk to human health. Particulate matter consists of solid particles and liquid droplets both formed by organic and inorganic substances suspended in the air. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
The major sources of particulate matter (PM2.5) are human combustion of fossil fuels from activities such as industry, traffic, and power generation, but also household fuels (e.g. biomass, coal) burning for heating, cooking, and lighting activities at household level. Non-anthropogenic sources (e.g. fires) may also be important in some areas. These particles can penetrate deeply into the respiratory tract and therefore constitute a long-term risk for health by increasing mortality from respiratory infections and diseases, lung cancer, and selected cardiovascular diseases. 
The reported indicator value is population –weighted, because from a health perspective, it is important to know the extent of the exposure distribution among populations in order to assess the health impacts. 
Data Sources and Collection Method
The data for this indicator is collected using (1) ground-based urban air quality monitoring networks (WHO 2016a) and, where not available, (2) additional data such as satellite retrievals of aerosol optical depth, chemical transport models, topography, etc. Further details on the method can be found in Shaddick et al (2016). 
Data sources include official country reporting from the relevant ministries (usually the Ministry of Environment), but also regional and international networks such as the European Environmental Agency and Clean Air Asia, UN agencies, development agencies, articles from peer reviewed journals and ground measurements compiled in the framework of Global Burden of Disease Project. Wherever gaps in coverage remain, satellite imagery analysis is used to estimate data for monitoring this indicator. 
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method: 
Although PM10 and PM2.5 measurements are regularly collected in many thousands of locations throughout the world, the amount of monitors in different geographical areas vary, with some areas having little or no monitoring (WHO 2016a). Where ground monitoring data are available, statistical models are used to calibrate measurements with data from other sources. These include estimates of PM2.5 obtained from remote sensing satellites, chemical transport model, and other factors including sand dust and topography, all of which are available for every 0.1° grid-cell. The statistical model can then be used to predict measurements, together with associated measures of uncertainty, for each grid-cell. In areas where there is little, or no, monitoring the calibration models may be unstable, or too cumbersome to be modelled. For this reason, a hierarchical modelling approach can be used where, if there is not enough information to produce an accurate calibration equation for a particular area, information can be `borrowed’ from a wider geographical region (Shaddick et al, 2016; WHO, 2016b). The result is a set of nested calibration and prediction models that can be used to predict PM2.5 for each of the 1.4 million grid-cells covering the entire globe. These can be used to produce distributions of exposures for each country and, by linking exposures to estimates of population for each grid-cell – provided by the Gridded Population of the World (GPW) database - , distributions of expected population exposures. 
The following formula is used to obtain the aggregated mean for each country:
￼
where Cn is the estimated mean annual fine particulate matter for the city[1] (or grid(s) corresponding to that city[2]) n, Pn is the population of the city1 (or grid(s) corresponding to that city2) n. 
The same formula is used to derive country estimates (rural and urban), by aggregating the grid cells that include the country (as opposed to the city). 
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators: N/A

[1] For countries with PM2.5 ground measurements available.
[2] WHO is reporting modelled data estimates for 11.6.2, which are available at grid-level globally (WHO 2016b,c)
Data Disaggregation
Data is available at available globally at a high spatial resolution (0.1◦ x 0.1◦) – e.g. each grid corresponds approximately to 11x11km at the equator, which can be further aggregated at country, urban or rural level. 
Indicator 11.b.1: Number of countries that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030
Target 11.b: By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels
Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Definition and Rationale
Definition:
This indicator measures the number of countries that adopt and implement national disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, with multiple dimensions of the level of implementation. 
Concepts:
Disaster risk reduction strategies: define goals and objectives across different timescales and with concrete targets, indicators and time frames. In line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, these should be aimed at preventing the creation of disaster risk, the reduction of existing risk and the strengthening of economic, social, health and environmental resilience. 
Rationale and Interpretation:
The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 was adopted by UN Member States in March 2015 as a global policy of disaster risk reduction. Among the global targets, “Target E: Substantially increase the number of countries with national and local disaster risk reduction strategies by 2020” will promote DRR and eventually contribute to sustainable development and strengthen economic, social, health and environmental resilience. The economic, environmental and social perspectives would include poverty eradication, urban resilience, and climate change adaptation. Their economic, environmental and social perspectives would include poverty eradication, urban resilience, and climate change adaptation.
In line with the Sendai Framework, DRR strategies and policies should mainstream and integrate disaster risk reduction within and across all sectors, across different timescales and with targets, indicators and time frames. These DRR strategies should be aimed at preventing the creation of disaster risk, the reduction of existing risk, the strengthening of economic, social, health and environmental resilience, and other key elements stipulated in the Sendai Framework.
The open-ended intergovernmental expert working group on indicators and terminology relating to disaster risk reduction (OIEWG) established by the General Assembly (resolution 69/284) has developed a set of indicators to measure global progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework, which was endorsed by the UNGA (OIEWG report A/71/644). The relevant global indicator for the Sendai Framework, E-1, is used to report for this indicator. 
Data Sources and Collection Method
Appointed Sendai Framework focal points. 
In most countries national disaster loss databases are established and managed by special purpose agencies including national disaster management agencies, civil protection agencies, and meteorological agencies, and disaster data collected by line ministries.  The Sendai Framework Focal Points in each country are responsible of data reporting through the online Sendai Framework Monitoring System.
Method of Computation and Other Methodological Considerations
Computation Method:
Detailed methodologies can be found in the Technical Guidance (see the Reference) 
Summary 
This is a quantitative indicator by increment measurements for achievement that would quantify the improvement in the quality of national DRR strategies over time, rather than binary measurement (yes/no), which was based on the deliberations of the OIEWG as well as the IAEG-SDGs. 
Ten Key elements derived from the Sendai Framework are used as sub-indicators (5 levels from 0 to 1: 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.0) to measure the alignment with the Sendai Framework. Member States are to assess the level of implementation for each sub-indicator. 
This indicator is calculated through the arithmetic  average of these sub-indicators: 
National DRR strategies are to 
i. Have different timescales, with targets, indicators and time frames
ii. Have aims at preventing the creation of risk
iii. Have aims at reducing existing risk
iv. Have aims at strengthening economic, social, health and environmental resilience
v. Address the recommendations of Priority 1, Understanding disaster risk : Based on risk knowledge and assessments to identify risks at the local and national levels of the technical, financial and administrative disaster risk management capacity
vi. Address the recommendations of Priority 2, Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risk : Mainstream and integrate DRR within and across all sectors with defining roles and responsibilities
vii. Address the recommendations of Priority 3, Investing in disaster risk reduction for resilience : Guide to allocation of the necessary resources at all levels of administration for the development and the implementation of DRR strategies in all relevant sectors
viii. Address the recommendations of Priority 4, Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response and to “Build Back Better” in recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction : Strengthen disaster preparedness for response and integrate DRR response preparedness and development measures to make nations and communities resilient to disasters
ix. Promote policy coherence relevant to disaster risk reduction such as sustainable development, poverty eradication, and climate change, notably with the SDGs and the Paris Agreement
x. Have mechanisms to follow-up, periodically assess and publicly report on progress. 
Comments and limitations:
The Sendai Framework Monitoring System has been developed to measure the progress in the implementation of the Sendai Framework by UNGA endorsed indicators. Member States are to report through the System from March 2018. The data for SDG indicators are compiled and reported by UNISDR.
In contrast to a binary measurement of “legislative and/or regulatory provisions of DRR” in the previous Hyogo Framework for Action Monitor, the Sendai Framework Monitor can incrementally measure the progress by with multiple dimensions of the level of implementation. 
Proxy, alternative and additional indicators: N/A
Data Disaggregation
None
SDG 11: Cities

Cities are hubs for ideas, commerce, culture, science, productivity, social development and much more. At their best, cities have enabled people to advance socially and economically. With the number of people living within cities projected to rise to 5 billion people by 2030, its important that efficient urban planning and management practices are in place to deal with the challenges brought by urbanization.

Many challenges exist to maintaining cities in a way that continues to create jobs and prosperity without straining land and resources. Common urban challenges include congestion, lack of funds to provide basic services, a shortage of adequate housing, declining infrastructure and rising air pollution within cities.

Rapid urbanization challenges, such as the safe removal and management of solid waste within cities, can be overcome in ways that allow them to continue to thrive and grow, while improving resource use and reducing pollution and poverty. One such example is an increase in municipal waste collection. There needs to be a future in which cities provide opportunities for all, with access to basic services, energy, housing, transportation and more.



Half of humanity  3.5 billion people  lives in cities today and 5 billion people are projected to live in cities by 2030.
95 per cent of urban expansion in the next decades will take place in developing world
883 million people live in slums today and most them are found in Eastern and South-Eastern Asia.
The worlds cities occupy just 3 per cent of the Earths land, but account for 60-80 per cent of energy consumption and 75 per cent of carbon emissions.
Rapid urbanization is exerting pressure on fresh water supplies, sewage, the living environment, and public health
As of 2016, 90% of urban dwellers have been breathing unsafe air, resulting in 4.2 million deaths due to ambient air pollution. More than half of the global urban population were exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times higher than the safety standard.
Goal 11 targets

ensure access for all to adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services and upgrade slums provide access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons enhance inclusive and sustainable urbanization and capacity for participatory, integrated and sustainable human settlement planning and management in all countries
Strengthen efforts to protect and safeguard the worlds cultural and natural heritage significantly reduce the number of deaths and the number of people affected and substantially decrease the direct economic losses relative to global gross domestic product caused by disasters, including water-related disasters, with a focus on protecting the poor and people in vulnerable situations reduce the adverse per capita environmental impact of cities, including by paying special attention to air quality and municipal and other waste management provide universal access to safe, inclusive and accessible, green and public spaces, in particular for women and children, older persons and persons with disabilities
Support positive economic, social and environmental links between urban, peri-urban and rural areas by strengthening national and regional development planning
By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, resilience to disasters, and develop and implement, in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030, holistic disaster risk management at all levels
Support least developed countries, including through financial and technical assistance, in building sustainable and resilient buildings utilizing local materials

 5 billion people are projected to live in cities by 2030
SUSTAINABLE CITIES: WHY THEY MATTER
To make cities inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
Half of humanity3.5 billion peoplelive in cities today, and this number will continue to grow. Because the future will be urban for a majority of people, the solutions to some of the greatest issues facing humans poverty, climate change, healthcare, education must be found in city life.
What are some of the most pressing challenges that cities face today?
Inequality is a big concern. 833 million people live in slums and this number keeps rising. The levels of urban energy consumption and pollution are also worrying. Cities occupy just 3 per cent of the Earths land, but account for 60-80 per cent of energy consumption and 75 percent of carbon emissions. Many cities are also more vulnerable to climate change and natural disasters due to their high concentration of people and location so building urban resilience is crucial to avoid human, social and economic losses.
I live in a city but Im not affected by any of these issues. Why should I care?
All these issues will eventually affect every citizen. Inequality can lead to unrest and insecurity, pollution deteriorates everyones health and affects workers productivity and therefore the economy, and natural disasters have the potential to disrupt everyones lifestyles.
What happens if cities are just left to grow organically?
The cost of poorly planned urbanization can be seen in some of the huge slums, tangled traffic, greenhouse gas emissions and sprawling suburbs all over the world. Slums are a drag on GDP, and lower life expectancy. By choosing to act sustainably we choose to build cities where all citizens live a decent quality of life, and form a part of the citys productive dynamic, creating shared prosperity and social stability without harming the environment.
Is it expensive to put sustainable practices in place?
The cost is minimal in comparison with the benefits. For example, there is a cost to creating a functional public transport network, but the benefits are huge in terms of economic activity, quality of life, the environment, and the overall success of a networked city.
 Take an active interest in the governance and management of your city
 Take notice of what works, and what doesnt in your community
 Advocate for the kind of city you believe you need
 Develop a vision for your building, street, and neighbourhood, and act on that vision. Are there enough jobs? Are you close to healthcare? Can your children walk to school safely? Can you walk with your family at night? How far is the nearest public transport? Whats the air quality like? What are your shared public spaces like? The better the conditions you create in your community, the greater the effect on quality of life.
                                           







Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
More than half the worlds population lives in cities. By 2030, it is projected that 6 out of 10 people will be urban dwellers. Despite numerous planning challenges, well-managed cities and other human settlements can be incubators for innovation and ingenuity and key drivers of sustainable development. However, as more people migrate to cities in search of a better life and urban populations grow, housing issues intensify. Already in 2014, 30 per cent of the urban population lived in slum-like conditions; in sub-Saharan Africa, the proportion was 55 per cent, the highest of any region. Globally, more than 880 million people were living in slums in 2014. This estimate does not include people in inadequate or unaffordable housing (defined as costing more than 30 per cent of total monthly household income).As population growth outpaces available land, cities expand far beyond their formal administrative boundaries. This urban sprawl can be seen in many cities around the world, and not only in developing regions. From 2000 to 2015, the ratio of the land consumption rate to the population growth rate in Eastern Asia and the Oceania was the highest in the world, with developed regions second. Other regions, such as South-Eastern Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, showed a decrease in that indicator over the same time period. Unfortunately, a low value for this ratio is not necessarily an indication that urban dwellers are faring well, as this can indicate a prevalence of overcrowded slums. Unplanned urban sprawl undermines other determinants of sustainable development. For example, for every 10 per cent increase in sprawl, there is a 5.7 per cent increase in per capita carbon dioxide emissions and a 9.6 per cent increase in per capita hazardous pollution. This illustrates the important interlinkages across the goals and targets.Likewise, managing solid waste is often problematic in densely populated areas. In fact, in many developing regions, less than half of solid waste is safely disposed of. As per capita waste generation continues to rise, the collection and safe disposal of solid waste will continue to require serious attention. Urban air pollution also challenged cities around the world, causing illness and millions of premature deaths annually. In 2014, around half the global urban population was exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times higher than maximum standards set by the World Health Organization.The quest for sustainable and coordinated urban development starts with national policies and regional development plans. As of 2015, 142 countries had a national urban policy in place or under development. Those countries are home to 75 per cent of the worlds urban population.
Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient andsustainable
In recent decades, the world has experienced unprecedented urban growth. In 2015, close to 4 billion people  54 per cent of the worlds population  lived in cities and that number is projected to increase to about 5 billion people by 2030. Rapid urbanization has brought enormous challenges, including growing numbers of slum dwellers, increased air pollution, inadequate basic services and infrastructure, and unplanned urban sprawl, which also make cities more vulnerable to disasters. Better urban planning and management are needed to make the worlds urban spaces more inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. As of May 2017, 149 countries were developing national-level urban policies.
		The proportion of the urban population that lives in developing country slums fell from 39 per cent in 2000 to 30 per cent in 2014. Despite some gains, the absolute number of urban residents who live in slums continued to grow, owing in part to accelerating urbanization, population growth and lack of appropriate land and housing policies. In 2014, an estimated 880 million urban residents lived in slum conditions, compared to 792 million urban residents in 2000. 
		As more and more people move to urban areas, cities typically expand their geographic boundaries to accommodate new inhabitants. From 2000 to 2015, in all regions of the world, the expansion of urban land outpaced the growth of urban populations. As a result, cities are becoming less dense as they grow, with unplanned urban sprawl challenging more sustainable patterns of urban development. 
		The safe removal and management of solid waste represents one of the most vital urban environmental services. Uncollected solid waste blocks drains, causes flooding and may lead to the spread of water-borne diseases. On the basis of data from cities in 101 countries from 2009 to 2013, 65 per cent of the urban population was served by municipal waste collection. 
		Air pollution is a major environmental health risk. In 2014, 9 of 10 people who live in cities were breathing air that did not comply with the safety standard set by WHO. 
Goal 11. Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable
With rapid urbanization, many cities are facing challenges in managing population growth, ensuring that there is adequate housing and resilient infrastructure to support these growing populations and addressing the environmental impacts of expanding cities and vulnerability to disasters. From 1990 to 2014, the proportion of the global urban population living in slums was halved, from 46 per cent to 23 per cent. However, with rapid migration to cities and corresponding increases in the global urban population, the actual number of people living in slums increased from 689 million to 883 million.Globally, as cities are absorbing more inhabitants, they are also becoming less dense. The average rate of physical expansion of cities is about one and a half times that of population growth. The regions that are experiencing the most rapid urban expansion  Eastern and South-Eastern Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and Central and Southern Asia  are also recording the highest ratios. Some of the forces driving this urban expansion include rising per capita incomes, cheaper agricultural lands on the outskirts of cities, more efficient transport and the proliferation of informal settlements. Managing solid waste continues to be a challenge in many regions, with significant and adverse effects from uncollected waste in cities, including direct and indirect effects on the health of residents and the environment. Notwithstanding the quality and efficiency of collection, according to data collected for 214 cities/ municipalities, about three quarters of municipal solid waste generated is collected. The collection of solid waste is a particular challenge in cities in sub-Saharan Africa, where less than 50 per cent of all municipal waste is collected. In 2016, 91 per cent of the urban population still breathed air that did not meet the WHO air quality guidelines value for particulate matter (PM 2.5) and more than half was exposed to air pollution levels at least 2.5 times above that safety standard. Unplanned and rapid urbanization and poor land management, together with non-risk informed policies and investments are major underlying risk drivers of disaster mortality. From 1990 to 2013, almost 90 per cent of mortality attributed to internationally reported disasters occurred in low and middle-income countries, many of which have seen rapid urban expansion in recent years. Countries continue to make efforts to adopt and implement national and local disaster risk reduction strategies that are in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 20152030. In 2017, of the 87 Member States that responded to the questionnaire, 50 countries reported that they have national disaster risk reduction strategies and 34 reported they have local strategies. Furthermore, in 2015, of 95 countries, 84 reported investing in drainage infrastructure in flood-prone areas. Some 55 to 64 countries had introduced a combination of measures, including urban and land use planning, building codes and other risk-informed regulations.
