C. Development of Africa  Context82. While Africa’s economies continue to recover, challenges to inclusive growth remain, such as unemployment and lack of access to essential services and rights. The United Nations is firmly committed to supporting Africa in reducing poverty, empowering people, increasing the engagement of women and youth, pursuing transformative action and investments in climate change mitigation and fostering inclusive development.  Key objectives83. The United Nations Secretariat maintains two significant programmes in support of Africa’s development. Through the Special Adviser on Africa, the United Nations helps to raise international awareness on issues affecting Africa and strengthens the coherence of the Organization’s work across the peace, security and development nexus. Through the work of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the United Nations promotes economic and social development on the continent, helps to foster intraregional integration and promotes international cooperation.  Key outcomes and results84. Over the course of 2018, the United Nations and the African Union further deepened their partnership. Most importantly, a new sustainable development framework between the two organizations, signed in January, envisions stronger coordination to ensure that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union’s Agenda 2063 are mainstreamed and integrated in national development plans and that they contribute positively to people-centred and planet-sensitive structural transformation in Africa.85. In support of the global and regional development agendas, ECA, for example, created a toolkit that facilitates streamlined planning and reporting by African Governments on the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063. To help boost regional integration, the United Nations and the new African Union Development Agency collaborated in supporting the African Continental Free Trade Area. The United Nations also continued to support efforts by the African Union Commission to enhance preparedness and resilience-building through disaster risk reduction frameworks.86. The United Nations worked with the African Union to maximize the positive contribution of migration on the continent and address the related challenges. In that context, United Nations support has been focused on the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration and the global compact on refugees.  Outlook87. The United Nations will continue to provide sustained global advocacy on African issues and generate cutting-edge policy research on key priorities while providing policy advice at the regional and country levels. In that context, the Organization will advocate and support the African Union’s efforts to help “silence the guns” by 2020, advance the African Continental Free Trade Area and implement the Addis Ababa Action Agenda (resolution 69/313, annex) and the Paris Agreement (FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex). Those efforts will feed into the broader support of the United Nations for the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063. C.	Development of Africa As I am a strong believer in African-led solutions to African problems, I made the solemn promise that the relationship between the United Nations and the African Union will be based on mutual respect, solidarity, complementarity and interdependence to deliver effectively for the African people. Our mutual goals and aspirations are not only about economic development, environmental protection and reduced conflict, but also about a fundamental commitment to social justice for all and leaving no one behind. These are also the guiding principles for our work and partnerships on the continent. To complement the United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security accomplished in 2017, we signed the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at the African Union Summit in January 2018. The goal of the new framework is to further accelerate the implementation of the sustainable development agenda in Africa, one of my highest priorities. It envisions stronger coordination between the two organizations to ensure that both Agendas are mainstreamed into national planning frameworks and contribute to people-centred and environmentally sustainable structural transformation in Africa. A harmonized and integrated approach to the implementation and monitoring of the two Agendas will minimize duplication, optimize domestic resource mobilization and strengthen partnerships. It will thus help us to better serve the true beneficiaries of our efforts, the Africans themselves, enabling them to unleash their full social and economic potential.To enhance our collective response in the Sahel region, for instance, an international high-level conference on the Sahel was held in February 2018 by the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, the United Nations, the African Union and the European Union, which resulted in pledges of €414 million, complemented by a technical agreement and a robust compliance framework to address human rights abuses and violations of international humanitarian law. Furthermore, the United Nations has developed a United Nations support plan for the Sahel to accelerate implementation of key programmes in support of national and regional priorities. The plan, which is aligned with the 2030 Agenda and Agenda 2063, provides for strategic support by the United Nations across the governance, peace, recovery and socioeconomic pillars.Intra-African exports made up only 18 per cent of total exports in 2016, compared to 59 and 69 per cent for intra-Asia and intra-Europe exports, respectively. To address this issue, in March 2018, in Kigali, 44 African Heads of State and Government signed the framework to establish the African Continental Free Trade Area, a landmark initiative of the African Union. The Free Trade Area will cover a market of 1.2 billion people and a gross domestic product of $2.5 trillion. By progressively eliminating tariffs on intra-African trade, it will contribute significantly to Africa’s regional economic integration and structural transformation. Enhanced intra-continental trade will potentially generate cross-border entrepreneurial initiatives and decent jobs, help to formalize the informal sector and create opportunities for the growing youth population, thus harnessing the continent’s demographic dividend. The United Nations has undertaken several activities in 2018 in a number of African countries (for example, Angola, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Comoros, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mali and the United Republic of Tanzania) to provide integrated packages of support, including toolkits and software designed by the Economic Commission for Africa to align the targets of the Sustainable Development Goals and Agenda 2063. The annual Africa Regional Forum on Sustainable Development met to review progress, promote learning by sharing experiences, good practices and lessons learned and build consensus on policy recommendations to accelerate implementation of the development agenda.Development of Africa: demographic aspectsChanges in the global population affect the implementation of the 2030 Agenda; therefore the location and demographic characteristics of people need to be taken into account. Africa has the fastest growing population of all major regions and that is expected to continue for decades to come (see figure II). Supporting larger populations and improving their quality of life without bringing about negative environmental impacts or otherwise diminishing the quality of life of future generations remains the central challenge of sustainable development. Figure II World population estimates and projections, by region, 1950–2100Africa is the only region where the number of young people aged 15–24 years is projected to increase until mid-century (see figure III). The ability of countries to harness the demographic dividend depends critically on investments in education, health care and job opportunities needed for a productive integration of working-age women and men into the labour force. If human capital investment falls short or if the labour market is unable to generate productive employment opportunities, the potential of the demographic dividend may be squandered. The consideration of these major changes in the size, characteristics and location of the human population should be part of data-driven planning for sustainable development. C.	Development of AfricaOne of my highest priorities is to strengthen United Nations efforts in Africa. To reinforce this commitment, my first trip as Secretary-General was to attend the African Union Summit in Addis Ababa in January, where I met with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, Moussa Faki Mahamat. In April, I convened in New York the first United Nations-African Union Annual Conference, where we pledged to strengthen and deepen cooperation and underscored the importance of the strategic partnership between the two organizations in efforts to promote sustainable development, peace and security and human rights on the continent.Africa today, like other parts of the world, presents a dynamic yet contradictory picture of progress and challenges. On the one hand, economic growth in several African countries surpassed that in other parts of the globe, and the data encouragingly show that enrolment in primary education in sub-Saharan Africa improved dramatically from 52 per cent in 1990 to 80 per cent in 2015, while the reduction in child mortality rates has also been significant. Yet some parts of Africa face threats and challenges involving protracted violence and human insecurity that undermine development. Continued conflict has meant that three of the four countries currently facing severe threats of famine are located in Africa. Economically, the continent remains highly commodity dependent, while, as a result of the volatility in global commodity prices, unstable export income in many African countries has significantly affected economic growth patterns. Future challenges also confront the continent. Projected population growth estimates show Africa as the fastest-growing region of the world (see figure IV), with a growing youth population that will reach about 60 per cent of the total population by 2050 (see figure V). These young people require education, jobs, housing and health care, thereby putting pressure on Governments to deliver. 	Figure IV World population estimates and projections, by region, 2000-2050	Figure V Youth aged 15-24 years, by region, 1950-2060The continent can take advantage of this demographic dividend by investing in quality education, teacher training, technology and innovation, which would boost productivity, create jobs and promote inclusive growth and prosperity. Scaling up investments and strengthening the ability of institutions to deliver innovative solutions will involve multilateral partnerships, which the United Nations can facilitate. Providing opportunities and empowering women and youth as a development goal will be essential. The 2030 Agenda is key to Africa’s future, and the United Nations is working closely with its partners in Africa towards a mutually reinforcing implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals, in harmony with the African Union’s Agenda 2063. To promote these synergies, the United Nations and the African Union have together adopted a common reporting architecture with a single monitoring and evaluation framework. Furthermore, in December 2016 the General Assembly adopted the Framework for a Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027 (resolution 71/254). These dynamics require a concentrated effort, and it is in the interest of every country in the world to focus on preparing a strong future for Africa.C.	Development of AfricaAfrica’s development priorities identified in the African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda were enshrined during the reporting period in several continental and global landmark agreements, including the African Union Agenda 2063, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda. Effective implementation of these agendas will require coherence and complementarity between global, continental, regional, national and local efforts. The continent has embarked on the first ten-year implementation plan for the African Union Agenda 2063. The Agenda’s people-centred approach promises to enhance inclusive economic and social progress and its emphasis on agriculture development, infrastructure development and industrialization provides critical drivers for job creation and poverty eradication. The United Nations system is supporting the efforts of the African Union, the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and African regional economic communities for the effective implementation of the new agendas.The slowdown in the economies of major trading partners and low commodity prices decreased growth projections for Africa during the reporting period. However, the remarkable economic performance of past years was sustained in part through improving macroeconomic management and economic diversification. Africa continued to make progress in the implementation of NEPAD. African countries have also continued their efforts to promote regional integration, including through the Tripartite Free Trade Area, which provides a strong foundation for the establishment of the Continental Free Trade Area by 2017. The partnership between the United Nations and the African Union deepened considerably, including through the adoption of the Framework for a Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017-2027 and through efforts to finalize a joint United Nations-African Union framework for an enhanced partnership in peace and security. The United Nations continues to support the Silencing the Guns initiative of the African Union to end all wars in Africa by 2020. Both the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the African Union Agenda 2063 recognize the importance of peace and stability, not only as critical enablers but also as important components of sustainable development. In line with this aspiration, Africa has also continued, with the support of the United Nations and development partners, to address emerging challenges to peace, security and development, such as the rise of terrorism and violent extremism as well as the growing number of migrants, refugees and internally displaced persons. In this regard, African countries continue to attach great importance to tackling the root causes of conflict such as youth unemployment, inequality, and economic and social exclusion, including through the African Peace and Security Architecture and the African Governance Architecture. Recognizing the critical needs and role of women, the African Union declared 2016 the African Year of Human Rights with Particular Focus on the Rights of Women. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica’s development gains continued in the reporting period. The economic growth rate is projected to rise to 4.6 per cent in 2015, up from 3.5 per cent in 2014. With support from the United Nations, progress was made in priority sectors of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development, including infrastructure, agriculture and food security, health, education, science and technology, transport, gender equality and governance. Within the framework of the United Nations monitoring mechanism, the Organization worked to strengthen international support to Africa’s development through a review of implementation of commitments. The first biennial report of the United Nations monitoring mechanism was submitted to the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth session. Through the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and the interdepartmental task force on African affairs, the Organization worked to ensure coherent and better coordinated United Nations system-wide support to Africa.This past year was notable in several respects, with the end of the Millennium Development Goals and the Framework for the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme for the African Union approaching. United Nations support was therefore focused in particular on ensuring that the continent’s priorities as encapsulated in the African Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda and Agenda 2063, the long-term strategic vision for the continent’s development, were taken into consideration in the successor agreements, namely the post-2015 development agenda including the sustainable development goals. The Organization also provided technical support for African countries participating in the Third International Conference on Financing for Development and the upcoming United Nations summit to adopt the post-2015 development agenda.Despite the persistence of security threats and the impact of climate change in some parts of the continent, some progress was made in addressing election-related threats and in strengthening the nexus between peace, security and development. Given the importance of women’s and girls’ empowerment and leadership in peace, security and development, the United Nations also worked to enhance global visibility and awareness of the African Union’s agendas in this regard, including through a possible continental results framework on women and peace and security in Africa, and 2015 was proclaimed by the African Union as the Year of Women’s Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063.C.	Development of AfricaAfrica continues to make steady development gains. Economic growth reached 4.0 per cent in 2013 and is projected to reach 5.3 per cent in 2014. Improved regulatory frameworks, macroeconomic policy and business environments have helped to increase foreign direct investment flows by 6.8 per cent. Substantial progress was made towards the attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, in particular those on education, gender equality and women’s empowerment and combating HIV/AIDS and other diseases. Significant headway was also made towards consolidating peace and security and strengthening democratic institutions, including through multiparty elections. Challenges remain with regard to redressing income and gender inequalities, the lack of infrastructure and underemployment, in particular for Africa’s burgeoning youth population. Food insecurity and malnutrition are exacerbated by climate change and, in some instances, conflicts and political instability. The United Nations has helped to advance the African development agenda in several ways, cooperating closely with the African Union, including the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the regional economic communities, to develop the African Agenda 2063, a transformative 50-year development agenda. Important milestones included the tenth anniversary of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme, the fifteenth session of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa and the Dakar Financing Summit for Africa’s Infrastructure Development, held in June 2014.Institutional support was provided to the High-level Committee of African Heads of State and Government on the Post-2015 Agenda, especially in the formulation of a common African position, and several important regional meetings were jointly organized with the African Union, including a consultative meeting on sustainable development goals and a ministerial meeting in preparation for the fifty-eighth session of the Commission on the Status of Women. Coordination support was provided through the interdepartmental task force on African affairs and the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa to increase collaboration and strengthen coherence in delivering system-wide support to Africa. The Organization also undertook global advocacy for NEPAD by partnering with the African Union, the NEPAD Planning and Coordinating Agency and the African Peer Review Mechanism to organize the Africa-NEPAD Week in 2013. In view of the important nexus between peace, security, human rights and development, the Organization also continued to support efforts to make the African Peace and Security Architecture operational, implement the Human Rights Strategy for Africa and improve electoral management and monitoring. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica made significant development strides in the past year. Its economic dynamism is attributable to strengthened economic and political governance as well as an improved business climate and increased foreign capital flows, particularly from Africa’s new and emerging development partners. While these developments have reduced poverty levels and created a burgeoning African middle class, the continent continues to face significant challenges. Its economic growth has not been sufficiently inclusive or equitable and, despite significant progress on some Millennium Development Goals, levels of poverty, food insecurity, maternal and infant mortality and youth unemployment remain unacceptably high. Prospects for sustainable development are also threatened by challenges to peace, security, governance, the rule of law and the environment. The Organization worked closely with the African Union and its New Partnership for Africa’s Development programme, including the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and the African Peer Review Mechanism, as well as with African regional economic communities and Member States to address these challenges. United Nations support was provided to projects and programmes in infrastructure, water and sanitation, energy, environmental protection, information and communications technologies, transport, agriculture and food security, and democracy and governance. In recognition of the links between peace, security and economic development, the United Nations adopted a multidimensional approach. It also continued to support the African Union in implementing the Ten-Year Capacity-Building Programme in the specific areas of peace and security, post-conflict reconstruction and development, human rights, justice and reconciliation. At the fiftieth anniversary celebrations of the African Union in May 2013, I welcomed the changing narrative in Africa and pledged the continuing support of the United Nations to that continent. Efforts are well under way to ensure that discussions on the post-2015 development agenda fully reflect Africa’s needs and priorities. To that end, the United Nations worked with the African Union Commission and the African Development Bank to initiate national, regional and continental consultations with the aim of arriving at an African common position. Progress was also made on the establishment of a monitoring mechanism as mandated by the General Assembly in resolution 66/293, for which the United Nations will provide a secretariat. This step is vital for reviewing the implementation of all commitments made towards Africa’s development. C.	Development of AfricaAfrica remained a key area of focus for the United Nations during the past year. While Africa continues to experience solid overall economic growth and the absolute number of people living in extreme poverty seems to be declining, inequalities persist. Unemployment remains high and armed conflicts undermine development prospects in key regions.The Organization worked closely with the African Union and its New Partnership for Africa’s Development programme, and the Millennium Development Goals Africa Steering Group, to advance the African development agenda. It partnered with interested Governments to implement projects that boost financing for development in areas such as sustainable forest management and to promote and strengthen the engagement of citizens in governance and public administration.A large number of countries with special needs, including least developed and landlocked developing countries, are located on the African continent. More than half of the population in least developed countries lives below the poverty line. Landlocked developing countries continue to be marginalized in international trade and face serous constraints to their overall growth due mainly to their lack of access to the sea and remoteness from major markets, inadequate transit facilities, cumbersome Customs and border-crossing procedures and inadequate transport infrastructure. Least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States further face difficulties related to climate change, desertification and loss of biodiversity. In the past year, the Organization worked towards addressing the special needs of these countries, including taking steps to implement the Istanbul Programme of Action, the Almaty Programme of Action, and the Mauritius Strategy.