D. Promotion and protection of human rights  Context88. Seventy years ago, with the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by the General Assembly in its resolution 217 (III), Member States proclaimed the articles of the Declaration to be the common standard of achievement for all peoples and nations. They committed to striving to secure the universal and effective recognition and observance of those rights and freedoms.89. Over the past seven decades, there have been encouraging gains in the mission to promote and protect all human rights for everyone. However, the global march for equal rights has left many people behind. People continue to bear the brunt of the turmoil and suffering in conflicts, resulting in displacement on an unprecedented scale, while all of humanity is confronted with the urgent existential threat of climate change. Outside of conflict, rising inequality and unresolved grievances are fuelling resentment, hatred and violence. The values and progress universalized and promoted through the multilateral system are being tested.   Key objectives90. In response to those challenges, the United Nations and its relevant subsidiary organs promote and encourage respect for fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion. In accordance with its mandate, the Organization focuses on mainstreaming human rights, promoting the right to development and conducting research and analysis aimed at the further integration of all human rights in the work, programmes and activities of the United Nations system, as well as enhancing the national capacity of Member States. The Organization supports human rights treaty bodies and the Human Rights Council and provides advisory services to enhance the capacity of Member States, stakeholders and partners on the ground in advancing human rights for all, including in crisis situations.  Key outcomes and results  Increasing implementation of outcomes of international human rights mechanisms91. As in prior years, United Nations-supported special procedures of the Human Rights Council, treaty bodies, commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions generated information to help Member States make informed decisions and address concerns in a timely manner. Through its technical cooperation projects, the United Nations enhanced the capacity of more than 50 Member States in 2018.  Strengthening rule of law and accountability for human rights violations92. The United Nations helped to strengthen the rule of law capacities of Member States, at their request, and supported them in establishing and enhancing accountability mechanisms. Accountability is essential for resolving past conflicts and grievances, while also contributing to the prevention of violations and abuses. The United Nations provided expertise on the establishment of transitional justice mechanisms and supported their daily work, as well as the work of judicial and civil society actors, including by contributing to the protection and participation of victims.  Preventing violations and strengthening protection of human rights93. Promoting the human rights agenda is a key tool for preventing human rights violations. The United Nations continued to engage in alternative dispute-resolution measures to ensure that the rights of vulnerable persons were protected, for example in land disputes and in cases involving tensions between internally displaced persons, refugees and host communities in West Africa. The Organization developed human rights-based early warning tools, which help to protect civilians and prevent the emergence of new tensions by allowing stakeholders to be better prepared and intervene earlier.   Enhancing equality and countering discrimination94. Climate change is at the origin of an increasing number of migratory flows, posing existential threats and deepening inequality. Through in-depth research on climate change and human rights protection for cross-border migrants, the United Nations contributed to the development of a rights-based approach to climate-related migration.   Inclusion of persons with disabilities95. The pledge to “leave no one behind” places the human rights principles of equality and non-discrimination at the heart of the 2030 Agenda. The Secretariat worked with United Nations system agencies to bring about a change in understanding regarding a human rights-based approach to disability. Progress has been made in moving from a medical to a social and on to a human rights-based approach to disability in United Nations system policies, which now better reflect human rights principles and standards.  Enhancing participation and protecting civic space96. In its World Development Report 2017, the World Bank estimated that, after continual expansion over the past decades, civic space is shrinking globally. Amid a crisis of youth unemployment and marginalization, young people are becoming one of the most vulnerable groups in society, at risk of exploitation, violence and insecurity. Making the voices of youth and children heard in the work of the United Nations is a matter of the utmost priority. In 2018, the Committee on the Rights of the Child led by example and broke with tradition by directly involving children and young people in its negotiations.  Outlook 97. The United Nations will continue to assist Member States in implementing their human rights obligations. The Organization will persist in amplifying the voices of victims, demanding redress with impartiality and being a catalyst for change to prevent further violations and abuse. This will include advocating the recommendations of human rights mechanisms to help strengthen institutions, improve legislation and save lives. The Organization will achieve this by making tools available and facilitating dialogue, advocacy and technical cooperation to ensure the effective application of international human rights standards. D.	Promotion and protection of human rights The year 2018 marks the seventieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, a milestone document underpinning all progress made in the advancement of human rights at the global level, so that all people can live in freedom, equality and dignity. Challenges to the protection of human rights are a global phenomenon. Entrenched levels of discrimination, inequality and violent conflict continue to displace millions of people around the world. In 2017, 68.5 million people were on the move, with women and children the most vulnerable to further exploitation. The global threat to democracy and the rule of law is steadily increasing; this is manifested by the frequent repression of demonstrations, human rights defenders and the media, accompanied by the dismantling of institutions and policies that promote greater justice. 1.	Protection of human rights in preventing conflict and promoting peace and securityAlarmed by the large-scale military operations in the North Rakhine region of Myanmar that caused some 900,000 Rohingya Muslims to flee their homes, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights dispatched monitoring teams to Bangladesh. The subsequent reports starkly highlighted the extreme suffering of the refugees and resulted in the establishment of an independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar by the Human Rights Council. In other contexts, the Council has mandated the continuation or establishment of a total of nine fact-finding missions, commissions of inquiry and groups of experts. Monitoring of the human rights situation in Ukraine in accordance with General Assembly resolution 68/262 contributed to early warning and provided support for conflict resolution activities under the auspices of the Minsk agreements. The United Nations supported the establishment of transitional justice mechanisms including in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia and the Gambia. In Kosovo, we worked closely with the International Committee of the Red Cross and authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to clarify the fate of 1,658 persons who went missing during the 1998–2000 conflict. In April 2018, we developed the first African Union-United Nations Framework on Human Rights and policies on conduct and discipline relating to sexual exploitation and abuse for African Union peace support operations.Protecting and promoting human rights is the cornerstone of the 2030 Agenda, as the High Commissioner for Human Rights emphasized at the conference held in Vienna in May 2018. The Sustainable Development Goals “seek to realize the human rights of all and to achieve gender equality and the empowerment of all women and girls”.2.	Broadening human rights protection and contributing to the enhancement of democratic space and developmentDuring the period covered, we continued to monitor human rights situations in several countries, in particular the situations of vulnerable groups such as migrants, the displaced and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons. The protection of human rights and the rule of law are key to the proper functioning of democratic institutions and the maintenance of civic and political space, which is increasingly under threat as a result of the adoption of repressive security legislation and emergency measures. We have therefore supported States in developing more comprehensive and human rights-compliant approaches to their security concerns through the provision of capacity-building and assistance to countries facing terrorism threats and attacks. We have also supported approaches that enhance interfaith and inter-community understanding through the Faith for Rights initiative be means of which faith-based actors explore the deep connections between religion and human rights. On 14 July 2017, we launched the Plan of Action for Religious Leaders and Actors to Prevent Incitement to Violence that Could Lead to Atrocity Crimes.The United Nations contributed to the protection of human rights defenders worldwide by providing support to national human rights institutions and carefully monitoring and reporting on cases of reprisals against persons cooperating with the United Nations. In 2017 we reported the largest number of cases spread across the broadest geographical locations, comprising 39 cases in 29 countries. Consequently, we have increased our advocacy work across all regions of the world to help better protect human rights defenders. In Guatemala, we supported the National Statistics Institute in integrating a rights-based approach to the 2018 national population and housing census, facilitating its engagement with indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants. In Kenya, Palestine and Uganda, national human rights institutions and national statistical offices have joined efforts to better engage with vulnerable population groups. In Chile, Germany, Malaysia, Thailand, the United Republic of Tanzania and Viet Nam, we provided support to implement the Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights; and, in collaboration with academia, we launched an interactive e-learning module on operationalizing the right to development while implementing the Sustainable Development Goals. Highlights of human rights achievements in 2017	•	45,000 victims of torture in 80 countries received rehabilitation support through 178 non-governmental organizations	•	30,000 victims of contemporary forms of slavery obtained assistance and redress	•	4,020 visits to places of detention were conducted	•	7,511 monitoring missions were undertaken to investigate and document human rights situations worldwide	•	Over 2,600 training sessions were delivered to around 54,700 government and civil society partners in more than 50 countries on monitoring and investigation, access to justice, anti-discrimination standards, responsible business conduct and other key human rights issues	•	Technical support to 70 national human rights institutions, including in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Iceland, Kuwait, Lebanon, Madagascar, Seychelles, South Sudan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan	•	Human rights treaty bodies considered a total of 165 State party reports and received 138 additional State party reports on progress towards fulfilling their international human rights obligations	•	Officials from some 70 States increased their knowledge and skills on international human rights and their reporting requirements	Listed here are highlights of the status of human rights since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.The world seventy years after the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human RightsPositive developments	•	Agreement achieved on 18 human rights treaties and options	•	104 countries have outlawed capital punishment, compared to 9 in 1948	•	The majority of States have a national parliament, compared to 26 in 1948	•	Women have the right to vote in 198 countries, compared to 91 in 1948	•	Freedom of information laws and policies have been adopted by 111 countries	•	The Human Rights Council continues its universal periodic review, which reviews human rights records of all United Nations Member States	•	United Nations Special Rapporteurs as independent experts appointed by the Human Rights Council carry out country visits, monitor, advise and publicly report on situations where human rights violations may be occurring	•	Peacekeeping operations now contain human rights components that address human rights issues	Remaining gaps	•		1 in 10 children are subjected to child labour	•	1 in 3 people in detention are held without trial	•	880 million urban residents live in slums	•	250 million women are married when under 15 years old	•	29 per cent of children under 5 years do not have birth registration	•	On average, a journalist is killed every four days	D.	Promotion and protection of all human rightsPeace is itself a human rights imperativeI am convinced, more than ever, that peace is itself a human rights imperative. Across our world, numerous crises and conflicts have erupted, involving repeated violations of the laws that protect people’s human rights even in times of public emergency and war. Medical facilities, religious sites and schools were repeatedly attacked and bombed in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In these and other crisis areas — such as Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Lake Chad region which has suffered the attacks of Boko Haram, Mali, parts of Myanmar, Somalia, the Sudan, Ukraine and the Occupied Palestinian Territory — hundreds of thousands of people have lost their lives. Survivors have been increasingly compelled to flee, becoming exposed to heightened risk of death or further violation as they move in conditions that fail to respect human dignity, leaving children hungry, unschooled and subject to violence. Stopping these crimes against peace and ensuring redress for victims and accountability for perpetrators must be among our most urgent tasks.Alongside bloody conflict, the past year has seen the continued deprivation of basic economic and social rights for millions of women, men and children owing to chronic poverty for some and weak governance or imposed austerity for many others. Massive inequality among genders, social groups and income levels has strained public confidence. All too often, economic and social insecurities are being blamed on “the other” — whether migrants or other racial, ethnic, gender or social groups — rather than on failures of public policy. In this context, millions have sought refuge from armed conflict and have migrated in search of opportunities and the protection of their human rights. The death toll from attempted migration across the Mediterranean Sea has been despairingly high, with some 1,900 dead or missing by July 2017, despite fewer overall arrivals in Europe compared with 2015/16. Countless more lost their lives or went missing in other regions of the world, and suffered torture, trauma and other human rights abuses en route.I have been distressed to see the malevolence of political discourse in many countries. Instead of taking a reasoned and cooperative approach, many leaders have fanned the growing flames of prejudice and fear which divide and weaken their societies. A wave of racism and xenophobia has swept the globe, manifest in stereotyping, racial profiling, hate speech and hate crimes. Perhaps more than ever before, the universal norms and mechanisms of human rights need our united support. In a moment of hope for the future, the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants (see para. 52 above) took a strong, principled stand, with Member States committing to protect the human rights of all migrants regardless of their migratory status at all times and taking into account the specific needs of those in vulnerable situations. The Organization is supporting States in this endeavour, but greater and more consistent leadership is needed across every region.Human rights are at the core of my call for prevention and sustaining peaceHuman rights measures are the lifeblood of any effort to prevent conflict and sustain peace. They are investments which bring both immediate and long-term benefits in building resilience, redressing grievances, reducing inequality and advancing sustainable development. This is why, in the past year, we have deployed rapid and multidisciplinary “light teams” to situations of concern in Burkina Faso, Lesotho and the Congo. The Human Rights Council established three commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions during the reporting period, on South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Burundi, respectively, as well as a group of independent experts on accountability for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights also deployed nine other inquiries, including on Yemen and Myanmar. These missions conduct on-the-ground investigations and deliver fact-based impartial assessments, giving voice to the victims and drawing attention to situations of urgent global concern. Their findings and targeted recommendations lay the foundation to hold States, non-State actors and individuals accountable. Field officers also monitor and investigate allegations to prompt States to fulfil their human rights obligations, thus preventing future violations. Working with media is also essential. Most recently, during the siege and bombardment of eastern Aleppo in the Syrian Arab Republic and during hostilities in Burundi, strong, well-informed public statements helped to generate media coverage, which helped to mitigate some serious abuses and violations. A backlash against the advancement of women’s rights has fuelled rollbacks of legislation relating to gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive rights. We must move with all deliberate speed towards greater equality, especially in terms of violence against women, conflict-related sexual abuse, trafficking and related exploitation and the pervasive discrimination that deprives millions of women of education, economic resources and reproductive rights. There must be stronger action against the recruitment and use of girls in armed conflict, including their sexual enslavement and use as suicide bombers. During the reporting period, we continued to assist countries to improve laws relating to the human rights of women and girls and agreed on frameworks for action to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual violence and ensure accountability. I am concerned about crackdowns abridging fundamental public freedoms — freedom of expression, opinion and peaceful assembly. The full participation of civil society is essential to making progress across all United Nations goals. Clearly, when Governments and their proxies clamp down against activists, lawyers, human rights defenders, journalists and political opponents — or scrap the guarantees of an independent judiciary — they are not acting to halt violence but are instead discrediting their own States and the trust of their own people. Denial of expression undercuts State opportunities for international cooperation and capacities to respond to real security threats and development challenges. Alarmed by acts of intimidation and reprisals against people who engage with the United Nations on human rights issues, I have taken action to strengthen the United Nations response to such incidents. Civil society participation is essential to the work of the United Nations and that of all of our partners. My concerns have deepened over the past year regarding attacks against human rights defenders, including several individuals engaged in defending persecuted populations, indigenous peoples, minorities, women’s rights, land rights and the environment. Across the globe, peaceful human rights defenders and those acting in solidarity with them have been met with growing persecution. The Human Rights Council’s universal periodic review process is now entering a new cycle, with every Member State scheduled for a third round of scrutiny. We will work to strengthen the relevance, precision and impact of the Council’s recommendations, including by providing better support to Member States in implementation, stronger collaboration with United Nations country teams and the establishment of national mechanisms for human rights reporting and follow-up to link the universal periodic review to the implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict reports annually to the Human Rights Council and the General Assembly on grave crimes against children, bringing to light the dire situations these children face.Ultimately, the 2030 Agenda offers a road map towards a more rights-respecting world. A strong focus on human rights, equality and the empowerment of women has been integrated into the revised United Nations Development Framework guidelines, while the entire United Nations system is now committed to integrating the imperative of eliminating discrimination and reducing inequalities, leaving no one behind. D.	Promotion and protection of human rightsIt pains me that the basic rights of so many people were violated or remained unfulfilled in the past year. The rights of asylum seekers, refugees and migrants were a top concern. Thousands lost their lives during journeys in search of safety, protection and a more dignified life. Refugees and migrants were faced with alarming levels of discrimination and abuse in countries of origin, transit and destination and inadequate respect for human rights standards. The forced displacement of people being at levels higher than at any time since the founding of the Organization, this became a pressing global issue. Cooperation between States on migration, greater sharing of responsibility for refugees, and gender-responsive, human rights-based policies and laws on migration must improve significantly if we are to protect basic human rights and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. In recognition of the gravity of the situation, the Human Rights Council held an enhanced interactive dialogue on the human rights of migrants in February. I issued a report in May (A/70/59) urging protection for refugees and migrants and calling, among other things, for a global compact on responsibility-sharing for refugees, the development of another global compact for safe, regular and orderly migration and a global campaign against xenophobia. I call on Member States to take decisive steps forward at the high-level meeting on these challenges to be held in September 2016.Racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance go beyond the issue of migration. They remain too common all over the world. The United Nations endeavoured to enhance equality and counter all forms of discrimination, including on the grounds of indigenous or minority identity, gender identity and sexual orientation, age, disability, income and albinism. The International Decade for People of African Descent was launched in 2015. Discrimination against women continues in law and in practice, many women suffering multiple forms of discrimination. Accelerating progress will require the universal ratification and full implementation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; removal of discrimination in the law; increased investments in gender equality and women’s human rights; strengthened accountability mechanisms; participation by women in all levels of decision-making; and addressing inequalities. The impact on human rights of growing inequalities, both within and between States, remained of grave concern to me. In view of the 2030 Agenda’s core objective of reducing inequalities and realizing human rights for all, the past year featured intense efforts to integrate human rights in development and the economy. The United Nations endeavoured to keep human rights concerns front and centre of discussions on monitoring, review and accountability and on financing for development. This focus extended to the United Nations early warning efforts, in the form of initial steps towards an early warning system that recognizes links between conflict and violations of economic, social and cultural rights. Indeed, these elements are at the core of the Rights Up Front initiative that, in consultation with the General Assembly, has been implemented further. The initiative seeks to achieve existing United Nations mandates for prevention and early warning by bringing the three pillars of United Nations action — peace and security, development and human rights — together, through cultural change, operational change and strengthened engagement with Member States. The recent adoption of substantially identical resolutions by the General Assembly and the Security Council on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture further strengthened this approach by recognizing that sustaining peace should flow through all three pillars of the United Nations engagement at all stages of conflict.The past year saw appalling disrespect for the protection of fundamental human rights and basic tenets of international humanitarian law in the context of conflicts around the world. Disregard for the core principles of distinction, proportionality and humanity in conflict situations by both States and non-State actors led to immense suffering, including in the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and Iraq. Nevertheless, important progress was made in integrating a human rights perspective in our peace and security work. The Security Council members increasingly called upon human rights experts to brief them, and included human rights analysis in their decision-making processes. The resolutions adopted on the review of the peacebuilding architecture encouraged Member States participating in the universal periodic review to consider the human rights dimensions of peacebuilding. The High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations underscored the importance of human rights and the protection of civilians in peace operations. In follow-up, the United Nations took steps to ensure regular public human rights reporting, to strengthen human rights training for peacekeeping personnel, and to consolidate specialized protection functions within human rights components of missions. Our commitment to early warning and protection materialized through rapid responses to human rights crises. Steps were taken to swiftly deploy multidisciplinary teams to countries where crises were developing or risked developing. The renewed commitment of the United Nations to conflict prevention is also an acknowledgment of the important role that human rights analysis can play in identifying tools for preventive action. With respect to the principle of responsibility to protect, I call on Member States to ensure that legal obligations are fully upheld in practice and that the highest possible standards of respect for human rights are maintained. Member States continued to look to the United Nations to provide independent, impartial and authoritative assessments of situations of concern, through human rights commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions. The Human Rights Council mandated missions relating to Boko Haram, Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic, Eritrea and South Sudan. Combating impunity and strengthening accountability and the rule of law remained a leading priority. Member States worldwide requested United Nations support on constitutional and legislative reforms, administration of justice and law enforcement, gender-sensitive reparations, witness protection measures and transitional justice initiatives and in relation to measures taken to prevent and counter violent extremism and to combat terrorism. This support enabled Governments and their civil society partners to align legal and judicial systems with States’ human rights obligations. The abolition of the death penalty remained a human rights priority. The Organization’s efforts to reach this objective included the biennial high-level panel at the Human Rights Council on regional efforts. As the actors with primary responsibility for fulfilling human rights obligations, Governments must act on their duties. Guaranteeing space for civil society to fulfil its complementary role is fundamental. It was thus very worrying that, during the reporting period, the global trend continued of limiting space for civil society organizations. The freedoms of expression, association and peaceful assembly were seriously challenged in many countries and in all regions. There were egregious reprisals against those who cooperated with the United Nations. Challenges frequently emerged during elections, campaigns by human rights defenders, social movements and political protests and in relation to counter-terrorism measures. The United Nations firmly defended the public freedoms that characterize democratic societies through advocacy and legal advice at the global, national and local levels. The Human Rights Council addressed chronic, emerging and ongoing human rights crises in the reporting period. These included the dialogue on migrants and two special sessions to address the atrocities committed by Boko Haram and to prevent further deterioration of the human rights situation in Burundi. During its three regular sessions, the Council took action to prevent further deterioration of human rights violations, including against Rohingya Muslims and other minorities in Myanmar, and in Ukraine, South Sudan, the Sudan, Yemen and Libya, while monitoring situations in the Central African Republic and Côte d’Ivoire on a regular basis. The universal periodic review maintained full participation in the course of its second cycle. The Council’s independent special procedures mandate holders increased in number, new mandates being established concerning albinism and the right to privacy. Mandate holders conducted 76 country visits in 2015. The human rights treaty bodies benefited significantly from the additional meeting time endorsed by the General Assembly in its resolution 68/268, resulting in the review of 173 State party reports; the adoption of views and decisions on over 160 individual communications; eight country visits by the Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; and national-level activities in more than 40 countries.The General Assembly, at its seventieth session, adopted 48 human rights-related resolutions, 30 of which were adopted without a vote. I regret that a number of resolutions traditionally adopted by consensus were voted upon at that session, including those on the rights of the child; strengthening the role of the United Nations in enhancing periodic and genuine elections; and human rights defenders, while other resolutions traditionally enjoying widespread support required unprecedented levels of political compromise to be finally adopted without a vote, for example, the resolution on prevention of torture. D.	Promotion and protection of human rightsAs human rights abuses are so often a cause and a major consequence of strife, unrest, displacement and humanitarian crises, it is no surprise that the gloomy picture painted elsewhere in this report prevails in this section too. The reporting period was marked by brutal disregard for human rights, extreme violence, persisting impunity and by the worst displacement the world has seen since the Second World War, exposing millions of innocent people to long-term uncertainties. It is hard not to rue missed opportunities to prevent such widespread human misery.More priority to timely, effective prevention is one of the purposes of the Human Rights up Front initiative. This was an important component of United Nations efforts to prevent and respond to serious human rights violations throughout the year, and led to much more consistent integration of a human rights perspective in the peace and security, humanitarian and other work of the Organization both at Headquarters and at country levels. The initiative helped to ensure that the risk of serious human rights violations — including violations of economic, social and cultural rights — were recognized early and that the whole United Nations system understood them as possible threats to development or to peace and security, and as a shared responsibility.Many countries and subregions experienced armed conflict involving a variety of non-State actors who spread terror across borders, were often implicated in organized crime and perpetrated gross violations of the human rights of children and women. While such actions are unforgiveable, a deeper understanding of the root causes of violent extremism is required. Alienation can be fed by years of corruption, repression, discrimination, deprivation and neglect of basic human rights. More attention is needed to the long-term work of building rule of law-based institutions and inclusive governance, education and trust. The United Nations drew attention throughout the reporting period to the need to address comprehensively these broader conditions, including by combating hate speech, promoting dialogue, protecting human rights and enhancing social cohesion, as the most effective means for countering the spread of extremism. I was heartened by the fact that Member States also reaffirmed important commitments and principles with respect to their collective responsibility to protect people from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. While these commitments are welcome, we have a long way to go before they are fully upheld in practice.A strong focus on inclusivity and equality was a key thread across the pillars of United Nations activity in the reporting period. Global human rights challenges, such as migration, disabilities, rights of women and children, sexual orientation, and the rights of various minorities, were addressed through promotion of equality and countering discrimination. A higher number of ratifications in the past year of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities demonstrates that States are receptive to new approaches on this issue. Some progress has also been made in securing the human rights of women and children but it is slow and uneven. The same cannot be said of migrants. There are more international migrants on the move now than ever before in human history, many of them facing unacceptable levels of human rights abuses throughout the migration cycle, in countries of origin, transit and destination. In response, the United Nations appealed for protection of the human rights of all migrants and called on Governments to embrace migration as essential for inclusive and sustainable social and economic development. In this connection, we issued Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights at International Borders.Growing threats to civil society, particularly acute in conflict situations, but also in the context of electoral processes, in countries in political transition, as well as in the framework of counter-terrorism policies, are a matter of great concern. The United Nations continues to assist States to ensure that civil society can operate freely and without harassment. Attacks on human rights defenders continued, as did, while repeatedly condemned at all levels, intimidation of those who cooperate with the United Nations and reprisals against them. I fully support discussions on the protection of journalists at the Human Rights Council, the General Assembly and the Security Council and welcome the recent adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2222 (2015).The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights addressed the Security Council on many critical situations, including those concerning the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iraq, Myanmar, South Sudan and Ukraine, as well as providing regular briefings on protection of civilians and other thematic briefings, for example in relation to small arms. The Human Rights Council considered Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iraq, Libya, Mali, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine.The human rights-based approach to United Nations programming continued with the deployment of 11 new human rights advisers to country teams in Bangladesh, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Malawi, Maldives, Nigeria, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, Timor-Leste, the United Republic of Tanzania and Zambia, and to United Nations Development Group regional teams in Bangkok and Panama. Human rights standards and principles were also taken into account in the design of the post-2015 development agenda.The United Nations human rights mechanisms continued to draw attention to a wide range of human rights issues, both thematic and country-specific, brought new issues to the fore and provided early warning functions. The number of special procedures mandates increased and an unprecedented number of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions/investigations were deployed, namely in relation to the Central African Republic, the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Eritrea, Iraq, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic and the Occupied Palestinian Territory. The recommendations in the report of the commission of inquiry on human rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, including the establishment of a field-based structure, were also vigorously pursued. The universal periodic review mechanism continues to benefit from 100 per cent participation of States and the overwhelming support of Member States. The process of strengthening the treaty body system (General Assembly resolution 68/268) was successfully concluded.Faced with the multiple challenges in the protection of human rights, an increasingly difficult financial situation and heightened demands stemming from new and sometimes unfunded mandates from the Human Rights Council in particular, my new High Commissioner led a prioritization and restructuring process in his office to ensure that resources are channelled to areas of highest impact on people’s lives. I fully support these efforts but recall that Member States are ultimately responsible for human rights protection and promotion and that the United Nations can only support them to that end.D.	Promotion and protection of human rightsThe year 2014 marks the twentieth anniversary of the genocide in Rwanda. As we commemorate one of the darkest chapters in human history, we are reminded of our collective responsibilities to promote and protect human rights around the world. In November 2013, I renewed the commitment of the United Nations Secretariat, funds and programmes to upholding the responsibilities assigned to us by the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council and the General Assembly whenever there is a threat of serious and large-scale violations of human rights. That was a first step in implementing my “Rights up front” action plan, which places better system preparedness and preventive action to ensure respect for human rights at the core of United Nations efforts to avoid future conflict. The action plan reaffirms the centrality of human rights to the work of the Organization and confirms that we will use the full breadth of our mandates to protect people at risk.The United Nations system has made progress on far-reaching policy initiatives aimed at mainstreaming human rights throughout its work. I applaud the call of the General Assembly to ensure that human rights are effectively mainstreamed in the post-2015 development agenda. The Organization has continued to take an active role in ensuring that the essential human rights dimensions of freedom from fear and freedom from want remain central to that discussion. We have continued to implement policies governing the way in which the United Nations conducts its own business, including the human rights due diligence policy and the human rights screening policy. The latter aims to ensure that the United Nations neither selects nor deploys for service in the Secretariat anyone who has been involved in violations of human rights.Events across the globe in the past year testified to the need for human rights to be integral to all that the United Nations does. The Security Council addressed human rights situations in, among other countries, the Central African Republic, Mali, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic. The Human Rights Council acted to address human rights crises worldwide, hearing from commissions of inquiry on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the Syrian Arab Republic, establishing a commission of inquiry on Eritrea and a special procedures mechanism on the Central African Republic, and requesting an investigation into the events that occurred in Sri Lanka during the period covered by the Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission. Those bodies promise a voice for victims, a step towards holding perpetrators accountable and a source of recommendations to help Governments and parties to conflict to comply with human rights obligations. The Human Rights Council continued to make use of special procedures mechanisms to track challenging country situations and thematic human rights issues. The second cycle of the universal periodic review mechanism of the Human Rights Council has continued to register 100 per cent participation by Member States, reaffirming its universal scope. Given the cycle’s focus on implementation, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in cooperation with United Nations country teams, has supported follow-up by Member States on recommendations by providing technical advice and financial assistance. Dialogue among Member States within the Council benefits from the engagement of civil society actors, which are an indispensable partner of the United Nations system. I am greatly concerned by reports of reprisals against persons who cooperate with United Nations human rights mechanisms. General Assembly resolution 68/268 has been a significant advance that will improve the system of human rights treaty bodies. While treaty bodies provide States parties with expert guidance on implementing human rights obligations and play a critical early warning role, a massive backlog of State party reports was limiting their effectiveness. I am pleased to report that support for the improvements, including building the capacity of States to report, will mainly derive from savings made by streamlining the current system.The Organization’s mainstreaming efforts have continued. The human rights responsibilities of resident coordinators have been strengthened, a new guidance note on United Nations country team conduct and working arrangements has clarified roles and responsibilities concerning human rights and additional human rights advisers have been deployed. Over the past year, human rights officers in the field have provided Member States with technical assistance and capacity-building to promote the implementation of the rule of law on the ground. They have also delivered critical information to alert Member States and United Nations bodies to situations of potential concern. That early warning role is fundamental to the Organization’s efforts to take preventive action to avoid conflict. On a sombre note, people continued to be subjected to serious and widespread human rights violations. My Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide provided a briefing to the Security Council on the risk of genocide and other atrocity crimes in the Central African Republic and South Sudan, in addition to continuing to monitor closely the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Myanmar, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine. My Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect engaged with Member States on the advancement of the responsibility to protect principle and its integration into the work of the Organization. In September 2013, the fifth informal interactive dialogue in the General Assembly on the responsibility to protect focused on the causes and dynamics of atrocity crimes and the measures that States can take to prevent them. In April 2014, the Security Council adopted resolution 2150 (2014) on the prevention of genocide, reaffirming paragraphs 138 and 139 of the 2005 World Summit Outcome on the responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.D.	Promotion and protection of human rights The year 2013 marks the twentieth anniversary of the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action. I call for the renewed commitment of all stakeholders to live up to their responsibilities and ensure that human rights is a core purpose of this Organization, in deed and in action. People reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights during the past year, raising their voices around the world to demand freedom of expression, justice, accountability, an end to corruption and misrule, decent work and a decent life. They did so through peaceful protest, engagement with United Nations human rights mechanisms and through consultations on the post-2015 development agenda. I urge Member States to hear those voices and to ensure that they live up to their human rights responsibilities, not only to listen but to act. Our ability to hear individual voices was strengthened with the long-awaited tenth ratification and entry into force of the Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, which provides for an individual communications procedure. Thirty-seven years after the equivalent Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights came into force, it is a landmark achievement. Yet there were too many cases in the past year of the opposite trend: civil society groups, human rights defenders, migrants and minorities faced growing pressures and restrictions on their rights to freedom of expression, association and assembly. Member States also reaffirmed important commitments and principles in the past year. At the informal, interactive dialogue in the General Assembly on timely and decisive response in the context of the responsibility to protect, in September 2012, and in Human Rights Council resolution 22/22 on the prevention of genocide, in March 2013, they recognized their obligations to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. At the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law in September 2012, Member States also made a commitment to ensuring that impunity is not tolerated for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity or for violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights law. The intergovernmental human rights treaty strengthening process also advanced during the year. Effective implementation of the United Nations human rights instruments remains essential to promoting human rights and preventing violations. I urge Member States to ensure the functioning and integrity of the system.I regret that, in spite of these commitments, we have let too many people down. In the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali, the Syrian Arab Republic and elsewhere, serious and massive violations of human rights were committed. United Nations bodies endeavoured to provide Member States with the necessary information to prompt action, making use of commissions of inquiry and other fact-finding missions. The United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights deployed a series of missions to Mali and neighbouring countries to gather information about the human rights situation. The High Commissioner published a study reporting the number of casualties in the Syrian Arab Republic from March 2011 to April 2013. She briefed the Security Council more often in the past year than ever before. The Human Rights Council extended the mandate of the commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic for the third time. It established a fact-finding mission to investigate the implications of the Israeli settlements on the civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights of the Palestinian people throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and a commission of inquiry for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The Human Rights Council also created new special procedures mandates for Belarus, Eritrea and Mali, and agreed on initiatives to protect journalists and human rights defenders. Reprisals against people who engage with the United Nations human rights mechanisms and restrictions on the enjoyment of economic, social and cultural rights also remain matters of serious concern. Within the United Nations system, important steps were taken to integrate and mainstream human rights across all our activities and to hold our own personnel and those we support to the highest possible standards. I called on all stakeholders to ensure that international human rights standards and principles guide the post-2015 goals and objectives and on Member States to ensure that human rights shape policymaking across the United Nations. Measures were put in place to strengthen human rights capacities and accountabilities in resident coordinators’ offices and country teams. The human rights due diligence policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations security forces was disseminated to Member States and implemented in a wide variety of cases. In December 2012, I endorsed a new policy on human rights screening of United Nations personnel, outlining the principles and methodology by which the Secretariat will seek to ensure that all its personnel will be screened for violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. D.	Promotion of human rightsRecent upheavals and protests in many countries and cities around the globe have exposed the fallacy that stability and economic and social progress can be achieved in isolation from human rights. Development cannot take hold in the face of political repression that thwarts fundamental freedoms. Similarly, addressing human rights is central to ending the cycle of violations and violence that threatens peace and triggers conflict. During the past year, the Human Rights Council actively addressed human rights emergencies. Two commissions of inquiry were established and reported back to the Council on Libya and the Syrian Arab Republic, while a new international fact-finding mission was established to investigate the human rights implications of Israeli settlements throughout the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem. The spirit of the Arab Spring motivated thematic aspects of the Council’s work, with new initiatives on peaceful protest, democracy and the rule of law. Reprisals against people who use the United Nations human rights mechanisms continued to be an issue of great concern for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Human Rights Council.The strong link between United Nations peace operations and human rights was further strengthened by the endorsement of a policy on human rights in United Nations peace operations and political missions. The policy provides operational guidance and will contribute to the effective delivery of mandates and more coherent approaches across operations. In July 2011, the Organization adopted the human rights due diligence policy, which sets out the principles and measures to mainstream human rights in the work of all United Nations actors supporting nonUnited Nations security entities. Over the reporting period, the General Assembly adopted the third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child and the Committee on Enforced Disappearances held its first session. Dialogue continued with all stakeholders on the implications of the growth of the treaty body system, which has doubled in size since 2000 without a proportionate doubling of its budget. On the basis of this dialogue, in June the High Commissioner published her report Strengthening the United Nations Human Rights Treaty Body System.Genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity lie at the extreme end of the spectrum of human rights violations. The responsibility to protect and genocide prevention are central concerns of the Organization. I called for 2012 to be the Year of Prevention, given the importance of early, proactive and decisive engagement to prevent mass atrocities.The events in the Middle East and North Africa throughout 2011 have underlined the relevance of the responsibility to protect as a tool for prevention and response. In 2011, the Security Council referred to the concept in resolutions on Libya and Yemen, as well as in a presidential statement on preventive diplomacy. The protection of populations from crimes against humanity and the risk of other crimes and violations related to the responsibility to protect were the basis on which the Security Council authorized measures under Chapter VII of the Charter in the case of Libya. The Human Rights Council invoked the responsibility to protect to call for preventive action in its resolutions on Libya and the Syrian Arab Republic, as has the High Commissioner for Human Rights. Over the past year, Member States, regional and subregional organizations have taken steps to establish national and regional genocide early warning and prevention mechanisms. The use of an array of diplomatic, humanitarian and other peaceful measures by regional and subregional organizations to prevent and respond to threats against populations in 2011 has highlighted the growing role of those organizations in protecting populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.