E. Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts  Context98. Today, humanitarian crises last longer and affect more people than ever before. Complex interconnected challenges – including armed conflicts, the adverse impact of climate change, natural hazards, environmental degradation, epidemics, food and energy insecurity, water scarcity and financial and economic pressures – are increasing the vulnerability of people while reducing their ability to cope. During the year, more than 132 million women, men and children needed humanitarian aid and protection. Nearly 71 million people remained forcibly displaced because of conflict, violence and human rights violations – the highest figure ever recorded. More than 60 million people were directly affected by natural disasters, including 17 million who were displaced as a result.  Key objectives99. Based on Member States’ mandates, the United Nations humanitarian programme is designed to ensure a coherent, effective and timely response on the part of the international community to disasters and emergencies. The United Nations advocates humanitarian principles, promotes knowledge-sharing in crises, helps to expedite assistance and develops policies for greater coherence. It also works with all stakeholders to reduce the risk and impact of natural hazards.100. In the long term, the United Nations aims to support Member States in addressing the root causes of risk and vulnerability and emphasizes the need to “leave no one behind” in pursuit of the 2030 Agenda. Humanitarian aid cannot replace political and development solutions. That is why the United Nations is focused on mobilizing the will, skills and creativity of the global community to help end crises and promote development, so that people become more resilient to disasters that cannot be avoided.  Key outcomes and resultsHighlight: improving access to avert famine in Yemen. After more than four years of conflict, Yemen – the site of the world’s most severe humanitarian crisis – continues to grapple with economic decline, institutional collapse, massive displacement, cholera and food insecurity. The United Nations advocated the improvement of humanitarian access across the country. As a result, by the end of the year, 45 out of 107 local districts that were facing extreme food insecurity were no longer in a pre-famine phase.101. To help the international community coordinate the response to disasters and emergencies, the United Nations worked with partners to formulate 30 humanitarian response plans and appeals in 2018, targeting 98 million people to receive aid across 41 countries. In Yemen, for example, the United Nations collaborated with 254 humanitarian partners to agree on priorities and a coherent strategy to meet the needs of 13 million people. Around the world, United Nations humanitarian response plans and appeals helped to consolidate financial needs totalling more than $25 billion and succeeded in mobilizing a record $15 billion in donor contributions.Highlight: compacts on refugees and migration. After two years of consultations, in December the General Assembly affirmed the global compact on refugees, which provides guidance on measures to better assist refugees and support host countries. More than 160 Governments adopted the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, which aims to enhance cooperation in the management of international migration, including in the context of natural disasters, the adverse effects of climate change and environmental degradation.102. The Central Emergency Response Fund, which provides funding at the onset of a crisis and for underfunded emergencies, allocated over $500 million to 48 countries/territories in 2018. This included $180 million for 18 chronically underfunded emergencies, the Fund’s largest allocation ever for forgotten crises. The United Nations country-based pooled funds channelled a record amount of $836 million to 686 humanitarian partners in 20 countries/ territories during the year, with national and local organizations receiving a quarter of those funds.103. The United Nations also worked to promote effective knowledge-sharing and advocacy. For example, more than 9 million people visited reliefweb.org, the world’s largest humanitarian information site, an increase of 31 per cent compared with 2017. In total, 16 million stakeholders consulted United Nations humanitarian web platforms.104. On many issues, the United Nations worked to advance policy dialogue. With his report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462), for example, the Secretary-General brought increased attention to conflict-driven food insecurity. Nearly 80 per cent of the world’s stunted children now live in conflict-affected countries. The Security Council, in its resolution 2417 (2018), subsequently recognized the link between armed conflict and violence, conflict-induced food insecurity and the threat of famine. 105. To help reduce vulnerability to natural hazards, the United Nations continued to assist Member States in implementing the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. In March 2018, the United Nations launched the Sendai Framework monitor, a global online tool, to monitor its implementation. By the end of the year, 88 countries were reporting data to track progress, enhance knowledge and promote accountability, and 87 countries had either completed or were developing national strategies for disaster risk reduction with United Nations support.   Outlook106. In 2019, nearly 142 million people will need humanitarian assistance and protection, the majority because of the impact of conflicts. Many of those crises are compounded by underdevelopment, fragile institutions and environmental degradation linked to climate change. The implementation of reform initiatives will offer a unique opportunity to increase the effectiveness of the Organization and make it even more fit to help reduce the underlying drivers of crises. Increasingly, the United Nations and its partners will seek to meet humanitarian needs and to strengthen collaboration with development partners in accordance with their mandates.E.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts Humanitarian challenges are on the rise as the United Nations mobilizes humanitarian action to relieve human suffering and save lives. The World Humanitarian Data and Trends report for 2017 disclosed that 68.5 million people have been forcibly displaced. Conflicts continue to drive humanitarian needs and displacement. Flagrant violations of international humanitarian and human rights laws deepen humanitarian crises. Denial of humanitarian access and bureaucratic impediments to aid delivery compound civilian suffering. During the course of 2017, the United Nations and its partners targeted a record 105.1 million people in 40 countries with aid, saving millions of lives, reducing suffering and promoting human dignity. The United Nations appealed for $24.7 billion in funding for humanitarian assistance and donors’ funding responses reached $13.8 billion. Yet the growth in need has outpaced the increase in funding. Through enhanced operations and funding mobilization, the United Nations and partners fought off famine in north-eastern Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen, and provided life-saving aid and protection to 700,000 Rohingya refugees. Early support was also mobilized to assist local responses to three major hurricanes in the Caribbean. The Central Emergency Response Fund enabled rapid responses to these crises. The Central Emergency Response Fund reached a record income of $513 million in 2017, of which $418.2 million enabled urgent, life-saving assistance in 36 countries. Country-based pooled funds raised $824 million, of which $350 million was allocated to the four countries facing famine and $117 million to the whole-of-Syria response. The 18 country-based pooled funds disbursed $647 million, enabling 636 organizations to implement 1,194 projects targeting almost 80 million people.In 2017, 30.6 million new internally displaced people were registered in 143 countries and territories, including 18.8 million displaced by disasters. The number of those forcibly displaced by conflict and violence reached 11.8 million in 2017, up from 6.9 million in 2016, bringing the total to 40 million people who remained internally displaced because of conflict by the end of 2017.In the first half of 2018, 136 million people in 26 countries were in need of humanitarian assistance, and United Nations-coordinated response plans required $25.3 billion. In April 2018, to mark the twentieth anniversary of the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement, a three-year Plan of Action for Advancing Prevention, Protection and Solutions for Internally Displaced Persons was launched. The United Nations relies on its partners across the international community to translate the obligation to protect civilians into practical measures and hold violators accountable.E.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance effortsDuring 2017, the United Nations and its humanitarian partners assisted more people than any previous year since the founding of the Organization. A total of 96.2 million people, more than half of them women and children, were targeted for life-saving assistance of food, shelter, health and protection in over 40 countries. Devastating natural disasters now displace three times more people than conflictsYet devastating natural disasters, such as floods, storms, wildfires and severe weather, now displace three times more people than are displaced by conflicts.More than 31 million new cases of internal displacement were recorded in 2016, the equivalent of one person forced to flee every second. Of these, more than 24.2 million people were displaced by natural hazards in 118 countries and territories, or more than three times the 6.9 million people who were recently displaced as a result of conflict. The frequency, intensity and cost of natural disasters have increased owing to changing weather patterns. The 2015/16 El Niño phenomenon prompted 23 countries across four continents to seek assistance for more than 60 million people, and there may be a new El Niño episode in 2017. An unprecedented food crisis has hit more people than ever before. Conflict, drought and violence have carried the threat of famine that has affected 20 million people in Nigeria, Somalia, South Sudan and Yemen.Nevertheless, disregard for international humanitarian law and human rights law remained endemic, as evidenced by attacks against civilians, humanitarian workers and medical personnel. To address these needs, in 2017 the United Nations appealed for a record level of $22.5 billion in humanitarian support (see figure VI). Yet despite the generosity of donors, who provided $12.6 billion in 2016, humanitarian action remained challenged by a lack of funds and access on the ground. The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs administered some $714 million in country-based pool funds to relieve 17 crises, along with $439 million from the Central Emergency Response Funds to support 47 countries through rapid-response and underfunded emergency grants in 2016.	Figure VI Global humanitarian overview figures: amounts requested and funding, 2006-2016	(Billions of United States dollars)In response to the unprecedented levels of humanitarian needs, the first ever World Humanitarian Summit in 2016 set out to reduce suffering. The Summit was evidence that the need for principled humanitarian action to better deliver to affected people is more crucial today than ever before (see figure VII). 	Figure VII Examples of people reached in 2016: a glance at humanitarian aid delivered around the globeE.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance effortsWe reached a critical juncture in the past year. Humanitarian needs outpaced anything we have seen before, stretching our responses to the breaking-point. During the reporting period, the United Nations and its partners appealed for $19.9 billion to assist 82 million people in 38 countries. This represents a tripling of the number of people targeted for humanitarian assistance in the past 10 years. While funding reached a record high of $10.6 billion in 2015, the resulting shortfall was also the largest ever. Forced displacement also reached unprecedented levels: the number of persons internally displaced owing to conflict and violence was 40.8 million by the end of 2015, and the global refugee total reached 20.2 million.The year was dominated by five major emergencies, in the Central African Republic, Iraq, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In the Syrian Arab Republic, some 13.5 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance, 6.5 million were internally displaced and nearly 4.6 million were refugees. In Yemen, approximately 82 per cent of the population (21.2 million people) needed humanitarian assistance. A total of 346 natural disasters were recorded in 2015, claiming an estimated 23,363 lives, affecting 90.3 million people, displacing more than 19.2 million people in 113 countries, and causing damage worth over $65.2 billion.The 2015/16 El Niño, one of the worst on record, has had devastating humanitarian impacts, leaving more than 60 million people in need of humanitarian assistance due to exacerbated droughts, floods and other extreme weather events. On 20 May, I announced the appointment of two Special Envoys on El Niño and Climate to increase attention to these challenges. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction brings disaster reduction into the mainstream of humanitarian as well as development action in an unprecedented way.In the light of the strains on the humanitarian system, I convened the first World Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul on 23 and 24 May. Three years of intensive, inclusive multi-stakeholder consultations paved the way for the Summit. Other inputs included the High-level Panel on Humanitarian Financing and my own report entitled “One humanity: shared responsibility” (A/70/709), which laid out five core responsibilities critical to delivering better for humanity. Member States, United Nations agencies, civil society, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and affected people met in Istanbul to mark a turning point in respect of what needs to change to better address and reduce humanitarian need, risk and vulnerability over the longer term. While the scale and duration of humanitarian crises around the world has stretched the humanitarian sector to its limit, global challenges such as political impasses in the face of crises, climate change, fragility and growing economic inequality, or pandemics, point to increasing humanitarian need in the future. This is a crucial time to invest in enhancing local capacities, reducing risk and building effective and inclusive institutions, especially in fragile contexts. We must also invest in women and girls, who are often affected differently and disproportionally by humanitarian crises. There was an unequivocal call for action at the Summit.Member States and other stakeholders announced commitments and initiatives within the framework of the Agenda for Humanity and the five core responsibilities in order to drive change and reduce human suffering today and tomorrow. Humanitarian actors must continue to deliver predictable, timely and relevant assistance to affected people fully in accordance with humanitarian principles, and stronger efforts in prevention and preparedness, as well as in achieving sustainable results that contribute to reducing need, must be prioritized.The World Humanitarian Summit and the Agenda for Humanity provided an historic opportunity to put affected people at the centre, but also remind us that we must transcend the humanitarian-development divide by working to reduce people’s vulnerability and risk. E.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance effortsThis reporting period saw several deplorable humanitarian benchmarks. More than 76 million people from 31 countries needed assistance. The number of people displaced by conflict exceeded 51 million — the highest number since the Second World War. There were more than 400 natural disasters in 2014, which led to the loss of over 17,000 lives and which cost over $82 billion in damages. The year was dominated by six level 3 emergencies (Central African Republic, Iraq, Philippines, South Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen) and the Ebola crisis. They unfolded in tandem with many other ongoing crises that caused tremendous suffering. While funding grew, so too did the funding shortfall, from 37 per cent ($3.3 billion) in 2011 to 40 per cent ($7.4 billion) in 2014. Nearly $11 billion was received for interagency appeals, an unprecedented $479 million for the global Central Emergency Response Fund and $600 million for 22 country-based pooled funds. Growing humanitarian needs continue to outpace the resources available to meet them.During 2014, the continuing lack of compliance by parties to conflict with international humanitarian law was of particular concern; so was the lack of accountability for perpetrators of violations. I was alarmed by the humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons in populated areas and by the effects of conflict on civilians in general, particularly women and girls, and the increasing number of people displaced. Millions of people remain without protection or adequate assistance, owing to hostilities, insecurity and obstacles to humanitarian access put in place by the parties.Despite the scale of the challenges, many Governments have greater capacity to handle crises, and therefore are requesting assistance less frequently, preferring that the international humanitarian system work in a more tailored manner to fill specific gaps, provide specific services, or further develop national expertise. There are many more actors, including national and local civil society groups and private sector companies. While this can pose a challenge to coherence, it can also be an opportunity to increase effectiveness if everyone works together towards the shared goal of meeting the needs of the affected population.To address the growing gap between needs and resources, the donor base must expand. Increased funding alone is not the answer, however, and I have appointed a High-level Panel on Humanitarian Financing to consider necessary changes. We need to operate differently, including working towards reducing and not just meeting humanitarian needs. The average length of a humanitarian appeal is now  7 years, and the average time that people are displaced is 17 years. Planning and raising money on a yearly basis for protracted crises, such as long-term displacement crises, is not the most effective or efficient approach. A longer-term, outcome-driven approach that brings humanitarian and development planning closer together is needed. However, without substantially higher political commitment to address the underlying causes, it will not be possible to cover constantly increasing needs. The post-2015 development agenda, the new disaster risk reduction framework, and the ongoing discussions around climate change and the new urban agenda are unique opportunities to better address these global challenges common to the development and humanitarian sectors. The World Humanitarian Summit to be held in May 2016, in Istanbul, Turkey, will set an ambitious and bold forward agenda for humanitarian work and will address some of these fundamental challenges.E.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance effortsBy the end of 2013, more than 50 million people were in need of humanitarian assistance. The United Nations and its partners continued to respond to humanitarian needs and emergencies across the globe. Four emergencies were designated by the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator as system-wide level-3 emergencies (the highest categorization possible). In the Syrian Arab Republic, violence and violations of international humanitarian and human rights law continued. Some 10.8 million people are in urgent need of assistance, including more than 6.4 million who are internally displaced. Another 2.8 million people fled and became refugees in neighbouring countries. In the Central African Republic, 50 per cent of the population is in need of humanitarian assistance. In South Sudan, more than 1 million people were driven from their homes during the first months of violence. Without an end to the violence, 1 in every 2 South Sudanese will be displaced or face extreme hunger by the end of 2014. In the Philippines, Typhoon Haiyan (locally known as Yolanda) affected a further 14 million people and displaced more than 4 million.In 2013, new actors took a larger part in humanitarian action and various partnership models arose, including cash-transfer programmes and remote management of operations by using local organizations and partners to deliver assistance. Furthermore, 95 countries, in addition to numerous multilateral and regional organizations, private sector organizations and individuals, contributed a total of $14.4 billion in funding to inter-agency response plans and complementary humanitarian action. That was an increase of $1.6 billion from 2012, largely owing to the magnitude of the Syrian crisis and Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines. The Central Emergency Response Fund hit a record high of $474 million in 2013. The rising scale of needs, the persistence of protracted crises and the interplay of new risks have led to a continued global deficit in the capacity of Governments and humanitarian organizations to respond, suggesting a need for a shift in the way in which Member States and the United Nations and its partners prepare for and respond to humanitarian crises towards a more anticipatory approach. As the international community prepares for post-2015 development and disaster risk reduction frameworks and the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016, it will be important to recognize that development cannot be sustainable unless the risk of crises is addressed proactively as a joint priority.For preparedness to be effective and sustainable, it must be integrated into relevant national legal frameworks and institutions, coupled with joint planning and coordination by all national and international partners and coordination among humanitarian and development actors. Innovative approaches to leveraging the capabilities and resources of the United Nations and other actors and to enhance interoperability are vital to the future of the international humanitarian system. At the end of 2013, each of the 10 largest consolidated humanitarian appeals concerned situations of armed conflict, most of which had exceeded five years in duration. Conflict can set back the development of a country by decades, leading to prolonged suffering and creating further vulnerability to disaster. E. 	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance efforts The humanitarian impact of man-made and natural disasters during the past year again tested the capacities of national and international actors to respond. We were reminded afresh of the importance of adherence to humanitarian principles, timely access to affected people and greater protection for civilians. We saw an intensification of some internal armed conflicts with millions of people displaced. Global displacement is greater than it has been in nearly 20 years. The humanitarian consequences of the fighting in the Syrian Arab Republic were particularly grave. There were also more than 300 natural disasters, including cyclones, floods, droughts and earthquakes, claiming an estimated 9,300 lives, affecting 106 million people, and causing $138 billion in economic damage. It was the third consecutive year in which economic disaster losses exceeded $100 billion. In 2012, the United Nations and its partners appealed for $8.7 billion to assist 51 million people living in 16 countries. Funding for 2012 consolidated and flash appeals in dollar terms ($5.3 billion) and in proportion to requirements (63 per cent) was similar to 2011, though considerably less than in 2009 and 2010 ($7.0 billion and $7.2 billion respectively). The Central Emergency Response Fund received $427 million in donor funding for 2012. Major global trends such as population growth, urbanization, uneven economic growth, increasing inequality, sudden or protracted political transitions and climate change suggest that humanitarian caseloads will continue to increase. Already, the consequences of disasters for national and regional development, as well as economic growth, have led many Governments to bolster national capacities for disaster management. People affected by emergencies also increasingly use technology to articulate their needs, to seek resources from their own communities, neighbours and Governments. Humanitarian actors can leverage technology to distribute assistance more quickly and cost-effectively and to map hazards for better coordination and planning. It will be essential to support innovation in the sector and for humanitarian organizations to harness the opportunities technology can provide. Member States and humanitarian actors are still better at responding to crises than at preventing or preparing for them. Recognizing this, the United Nations brought resilience to the forefront of the humanitarian agenda in 2012 through closer collaboration between humanitarian and development agencies to manage risks and address the underlying vulnerabilities. Increased synergies between disaster risk reduction, including preparedness, and climate change mitigation and adaptation efforts will be needed. Given the changing humanitarian landscape, we must continue to adapt and update the international humanitarian system, making it more inclusive and interoperable, connecting and convening all actors who can and want to contribute to different aspects of preparedness, response, resilience and recovery. We must put a greater premium on evidence, innovation and partnerships, as well as on enhanced capacity, especially at the local level. More must be done to engage affected countries. Preparations are under way for a World Humanitarian Summit in 2015 or 2016 to take stock of the changing environment, agree on how to adapt and make humanitarian action fit for future challenges.E.	Effective coordination of humanitarian assistance effortsAround the world, disaster management seems to be increasing in complexity. In 2011, the Organization coordinated humanitarian relief for more than 56 million affected people, nearly double the number three years previously. Not surprisingly, the financial costs of dealing with these disasters are also rising: billion dollar appeals for a single crisis are no longer uncommon.To address this new reality, the Organization is seeking to broaden its partnerships, strengthen the effectiveness of coordinated humanitarian action and ensure that humanitarian support is more robustly managed.The Organization is also making a significant effort to stimulate greater engagement on the part of Member States and regional organizations through a dialogue on humanitarian policy, and by creating new partnerships for operational support in emergency response. Examples of promising new initiatives include the dialogue on humanitarian partnership, led by Sweden and Brazil; and the HOPEFOR initiative, co-sponsored by Qatar, Turkey and the Dominican Republic, which is working to clarify the parameters for cooperation between military and humanitarian organizations. Cooperation with regional organizations, formalized by a memorandum of understanding signed with the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, the African Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council, has achieved measurable results in the field, in particular during the response to the famine in Somalia. The Organization also worked to improve collaboration between Western and Islamic aid organizations. As a result, the Organization was able in the short run to access areas in Somalia where Western actors were banned; and in the long run to pave the road for a more inclusive humanitarian community.In partnership with leaders from across the United Nations system, the Organization helped to launch the Inter-Agency Standing Committee Transformative Agenda, which tackles the challenges and lessons learned from the humanitarian responses to Haiti and Pakistan. The agenda sets out a wide-ranging set of reforms focused on making humanitarian response faster and more effective.The Organization was able to draw on lessons learned during the response in the Horn of Africa in 2011 to develop an early and coherent response to the food crisis in the Sahel. Working with partners, the Organization promoted the development of action plans on resilience-building, outlining high-level actions on advocacy, resource mobilization and support to national and regional leadership.I am pleased to report that the Central Emergency Response Fund raised a record $465 million in 2011, the highest level since the General Assembly established the Fund in 2006. This success reflects Member State recognition of the Fund’s positive impact on the ground and its solid management and accountability record.