F. Promotion of justice and international law107. The first substantive session of the intergovernmental conference to draft an international legally binding instrument under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction was held in 2018. The deliberations, which were assisted by a president’s aid to negotiations that was prepared to facilitate focused and text-based negotiations, provided a good basis for the future work of the conference.108. At the request of the Security Council, the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) – one of the first international accountability mechanisms of its kind – was established. The United Nations legal team helped to prepare its terms of reference, which were approved by the Council in February 2018. UNITAD will support domestic efforts to hold ISIL accountable by collecting, preserving and storing evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity or genocide committed by ISIL in Iraq. 109. Following the decision of the Human Rights Council in 2018 to establish an independent mechanism to collect, consolidate, preserve and analyse evidence of the most serious international crimes and violations of international law committed by Myanmar and the adoption by the General Assembly of its resolution 73/264, in which it called for the mechanism’s expeditious entry into operation, United Nations legal teams helped to establish and operationalize the mechanism, including by preparing the terms of reference, which were distributed to the Assembly in January 2019.110. The International Court of Justice considered many high-profile cases in 2018, including one request from the General Assembly for an advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965. On 25 February 2019, the Court issued its advisory opinion, in which it concluded, inter alia, that the process of decolonization of Mauritius had not been lawfully completed when that country acceded to independence in 1968, following the separation of the Chagos Archipelago.111. In November, the Trial Chamber of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia issued its judgment in case 002/02, convicting former senior Khmer Rouge leaders Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan of genocide, crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions. The judgment demonstrates that perpetrators of the most heinous crimes can be held accountable, even decades after the fact.F.	Promotion of justice and international law United Nations rule of law assistance in countries emerging from conflict has contributed to the protection of civilians, the extension of State authority, the fight against impunity and sustainable peace. These efforts include ensuring accountability for serious crimes that fuel and perpetuate conflict.The global focal point for police, justice and corrections arrangement has further promoted a coordinated, coherent and joint delivery of United Nations rule of law assistance in conflict and post-conflict settings, drawing on the unique and distinct strength of its members, combining operational interventions, political analysis and cross-pillar integration.To achieve the best results, constructive engagement of Member States with the Secretariat is essential before intergovernmental organs take decisions on establishing or supporting new accountability mechanisms in order to ensure due consideration of United Nations policies and best practices.1.	Support to domestic judicial authoritiesThe global focal point has provided timely and comprehensive support to 18 countries in 2017/18, including in transitioning contexts to ensure that inclusive and accountable security and justice institutions are sustained after the withdrawal of peace operations.In the Central African Republic, the United Nations supported the effective operationalization of the Special Criminal Court, including the arrest, handover and secure detention of alleged criminals and high-profile members of armed groups. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, support to the domestic military justice system led to landmark convictions in 2017 for rape, sexual slavery and attacks against civilians. In Mali, assistance to a specialized investigation unit on terrorism and transnational organized crime has increased the number of arrests and trials. In Afghanistan, the United Nations-backed specialized court and prosecutors’ office have renewed their commitment to fight corruption; and, in Darfur, support has been provided to rural courts to resolve intercommunal land disputes that fuel conflict. 2.	International courts and tribunalsThe Secretariat provided a dossier of documents to the International Court of Justice in connection with the request for an advisory opinion on the legal consequences of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965. In January 2018, I chose the Court as the means to be used for the resolution of the border controversy between Guyana and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. My good offices remain available to the two States to complement the judicial process. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia closed in December 2017, having accounted for all 161 persons who were indicted for genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity. The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals delivered its first ever appeal judgment at its branch in The Hague in the Šešelj case in April 2018. In June 2018, the Mechanism referred a contempt of court case to Serbia for trial, the first such referral by the Mechanism.In 2017, we made substantial progress in providing technical assistance to the African Union Commission and the Transitional Government of National Unity of South Sudan for the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan. The International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011 presented its first report to the General Assembly, reflecting on steps taken towards its full operationalization.At the request of the Security Council, I took steps to establish an investigative team to support domestic efforts to hold ISIL accountable, by collecting, preserving and storing evidence of acts that may amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide committed by ISIL in Iraq. We continue to cooperate with the International Criminal Court by providing support pursuant to the Relationship Agreement, including through the sharing of information and evidence, and the provision of services, facilities and various forms of practical support.3.	Promotion of international lawThree regional courses in international law in three continents were offered and 52 lectures were recorded for the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law. In 2018, the International Law Commission commemorated its seventieth anniversary, and adopted two major international law instruments.Equally important is the ongoing process for an international legally binding instrument on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction. The General Assembly will convene an intergovernmental conference to consider the text of the instrument. Another topic of increasing interest concerns anthropogenic underwater noise, which was the focus of the meeting of the United Nations Open-ended Informal Consultative Process on Oceans and the Law of the Sea held in June 2018. Justice and international law: impact highlights	•		The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia closed after accounting for all 161 persons who were indicted for genocide, war crimes or crimes against humanity	•	184 victims of sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guatemala, Mali and Mexico received legal assistance to obtain compensation and redress	•	More than 320 officials from 135 States have benefited from the treaty body capacity-building programme, which also increases the level of implementation of treaty body recommendations at the national level	F.	Promotion of justice and international lawThe United Nations is increasingly involved in promoting justice and the rule of law in international courts, treaties and agreements and in providing support to domestic authorities. While human rights are discussed separately in section D above, respect for justice and the rule of law are an integral part of human rights. Deprived of peaceful, legal redress, the lack of justice and the rule of law, some segments of society may be drawn to violence. Thus, the role of the United Nations in promoting human rights becomes even more necessary.1.	Support for domestic authoritiesA fully national Special Criminal Court has been established in the Central African RepublicIn a major contribution to sustainable peace, a fully national Special Criminal Court has been established in the Central African Republic, with comprehensive support from the United Nations. The United Nations will continue to contribute to the Court, which is unique in its structure and national foundation. The Court is created as a national court which includes both international and national officials, formulated to address more than a decade of serious crimes in the country. In its efforts to support the rule of law and respond to the horrific refugee crisis emanating from the explosively escalating conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations has been assisting in the protection of the human rights of those fleeing to neighbouring countries, mainly in Lebanon and Jordan. Also in support of national efforts in Colombia, I have designated a member of the selection mechanism of judges and other officials of the justice component of the final peace agreement. Furthermore, the United Nations is delivering critical support to 19 countries in 2017 through the Global Focal Point for Police, Justice and Corrections in crisis situations (see figure VIII). Figure VIII “One United Nations” approach to police, justice and corrections and the broader rule of lawIncreasingly aware of sexual violence and abuse, the United Nations has helped national authorities build their capacity to respond effectively. This assistance includes capacity-building for criminal investigations, prosecutions, military justice, legislative reform, protection of victims and witnesses and reparations. In Guinea, following the provision by the United Nations of support to a national panel of judges, 17 high-ranking military and political officials, including former President Camara, were indicted. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations support contributed to the conviction of 100 members of the State security forces. In 2017, the United Nations launched a flagship initiative on women’s access to justice. In the United Republic of Tanzania, the United Nations produced materials for a training course for judicial officers on human rights and violence against women, while in Egypt some 1,000 women benefited from free legal services.2.	International courts and mechanismsThe International Court of Justice, one of the six main bodies of the United Nations, continues to function as a central mechanism for the peaceful resolution of disputes and maintains a high level of judicial activity (www.icj-cij.org). Acceptance of the Court’s compulsory jurisdiction among Member States is one of my highest priorities.The International Criminal Court contributes to the international justice system by holding people accountable for heinous crimes. In an important contribution to international criminal law, it found Ahmed Al Faqi Al Mahdi guilty of attacks on cultural property and historic monuments as a war crime. In 2017, the Court also convicted Jean-Pierre Bemba, former Vice-President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in its first case on offences against the administration of justice.In the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, the Supreme Court Chamber upheld the conviction of two senior Khmer Rouge officials, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan, for crimes against humanity (www.eccc.gov.kh).In an unprecedented step, the General Assembly established the International, Impartial, and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. Equally unprecedented, the United Nations has provided technical assistance to the African Union Commission for the establishment of a hybrid court in South Sudan.3.	Promotion of international lawThe International Law Commission completed its work on a proposed treaty for the protection of persons in the event of disasters and made significant progress on a possible new treaty on crimes against humanity. To protect the world’s oceans, the Ocean Conference was held at United Nations Headquarters in June 2017. Member States also worked towards an international legally binding instrument within the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea to protect marine biological diversity in areas beyond national jurisdiction. Flagged as a major success, an amendment to the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer that will reduce emissions of powerful greenhouse gases was adopted by 197 countries in October 2016.F.	Promotion of justice and international lawThis reporting period saw the first completion by an ad hoc tribunal of its mandate, with the delivery of the Butare appeal judgment by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. The Security Council acknowledged the Tribunal’s achievements, including its contribution to the process of national reconciliation and the restoration and maintenance of peace. The closure of the Tribunal for Rwanda does not signify impunity for those whose cases were not heard by the Tribunal. Indeed, one of the fugitives (Ladislas Ntaganzwa) was arrested in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and transferred to Rwanda in March for trial. Meanwhile, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia concluded the trials of Radovan Karadžić and Vojislav Šešelj. Mr. Karadžić was convicted of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes while Mr. Šešelj was acquitted of all charges. At the close of the reporting period, the Tribunal remained seized of two appeals and two trials of senior political and military figures. The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals continues the jurisdiction and essential functions of the Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. There were important developments also at the International Criminal Court. The Court concluded the trial of Jean-Pierre Bemba Gombo, who was convicted and sentenced to 18 years in prison for crimes against humanity and war crimes (murder, rape and pillaging) in the Central African Republic. Ahmad al-Faqi al-Mahdi, who faces charges of war crimes for intentionally directing attacks against historic monuments and buildings dedicated to religion in Timbuktu, Mali, expressed his intention to plead guilty to the charges. This is the first case to be exclusively focused on the war crime of intentionally directing attacks against cultural property. At the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia proceedings are ongoing in all three chambers. The Special Tribunal for Lebanon is conducting the trial in absentia of five persons accused of perpetrating the attack which killed Rafiq Hariri and 22 other persons. The Tribunal also delivered judgment in the first contempt trial against a corporate entity before an international criminal tribunal, with the acquittal of the corporate entity and a journalist. The Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone, which continues the jurisdiction of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, is also continuing its work. The principle of complementarity in the Rome Statute demands that, in the first instance, prosecution of serious crimes of international concern take place at the national level. In this context, the United Nations is assisting in accountability efforts in South Sudan, the Central African Republic and Sri Lanka, in collaboration with Member States and regional organizations. In South Sudan, technical assistance is being provided to the African Union Commission for the establishment of the Hybrid Court for South Sudan to address international and national crimes committed since December 2013. This is the first occasion on which the United Nations has been tasked with providing technical assistance to a regional organization in the establishment of a hybrid tribunal. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission is assisting the transitional authorities in establishing a special criminal court. With respect to Sri Lanka, the United Nations stands ready to assist in implementing the Government’s proposal to establish a judicial mechanism to investigate allegations of violations and abuses of human rights and violations of international humanitarian law, which were noted by the Human Rights Council. The International Court of Justice in 2015 marked its seventieth anniversary as the main judicial organ of the United Nations. During the reporting period the Court delivered five judgments, three on preliminary objections and two on the merits. In the case concerning Certain Activities carried out by Nicaragua in the Border Area (Costa Rica v. Nicaragua), the Court found a violation of Costa Rica’s territorial sovereignty and navigational rights. In the case concerning Construction of a Road in Costa Rica along the San Juan River (Nicaragua v. Costa Rica), the Court held that Costa Rica had violated its obligation to carry out an environmental impact assessment concerning the construction of the road. In both cases, the Court found that there was no breach of substantive environmental obligations.The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women issued its general recommendation No. 33 on women’s access to justice. It stresses the importance of women’s access to justice in diverse legal systems and all areas of law for all women, irrespective of economic or social status, political background, geographical location, disability, sexual orientation or gender identity.The topic of oceans has been high on the agenda. Member States have continued their efforts to implement international law as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. This is key to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda, as it provides the legal framework for the conservation and sustainable use of oceans and their resources. The first global integrated marine assessment provided a critical scientific basis for this work. The Organization also took steps towards the development of an international legally binding instrument under the Convention on the conservation and sustainable use of marine biological diversity of areas beyond national jurisdiction.F.	Promotion of justice and international lawAt the close of the reporting period, the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia remained seized of three appeals and was continuing four trials of senior political and military figures. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda is seized of its final appeal and is scheduled for formal closure at the end of 2015. The International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which continues the essential functions of the ad hoc tribunals and maintains their legacy, delivered its first appeal judgement in December.The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia, in August 2014, convicted two Khmer Rouge leaders for crimes against humanity, although further proceedings continue. The international co-investigating judge issued charges against three individuals. The Special Tribunal for Lebanon continued the trial in absentia of five accused with respect to the attack against Rafiq Hariri and began the first of two contempt trials against commercial media entities.During the reporting period, the United Nations celebrated the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of its Relationship Agreement with the International Criminal Court. The United Nations has continued to promote accountability for serious crimes of international concern and to advocate universal ratification of the Rome Statute. The Court upheld the conviction of Thomas Lubanga in December and in March the Appeals Chamber established the principles and procedures for reparations for his victims. The Prosecutor opened a preliminary examination into the situation in Palestine, and opened a second investigation into the situation in the Central African Republic, marking the ninth situation before the Court.War crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and other gross violations of human rights undermine the very foundations of the rule of law at both the international and national levels. While the International Criminal Court was established to investigate and prosecute those crimes, the primary responsibility rests with the Member States. For that reason, we continue to accord high priority to activities in support of strengthening national capacity to combat impunity for those crimes, in line with international law.The authorities of the Central African Republic adopted a law establishing a national special criminal court to address serious crimes, including serious violations of international human rights and humanitarian law. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic will continue to provide support to the national authorities in connection with the establishment and operationalization of the court. I have developed options addressing accountability and transitional justice in respect of the international crimes committed in South Sudan.The Organization has continued to support the efforts of Member States to strengthen the legal regime for oceans, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and its implementing agreements. The implementation of those instruments contributes to sustained and inclusive economic growth, social development and environmental protection. Oceans have featured prominently in the work of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals. The Organization has also continued to strengthen inter-agency coordination and the coherence of United Nations system activities related to ocean and coastal areas, in particular through UN-Oceans.F.	Promotion of justice and international lawFurthering international justice and promoting the rule of law are of fundamental importance to the work of the Organization across its three main pillars. Another priority is to adopt a coordinated and system-wide approach to evaluating the effectiveness of the support provided by the United Nations system for the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-conflict situations. The reform of the security sector and the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation of former combatants that are undertaken by peacekeeping operations continue to contribute to early peacebuilding and the strengthening of the rule of law in post-conflict environments. However, early successes in those areas need to be consolidated through longer-term stabilization activities by the broader United Nations system and other partners that may enjoy a comparative advantage, once the peacekeeping presence draws down. Well-planned and well-resourced follow-on activities in this transitional phase remain important elements of the exit strategy for peacekeeping and require both political commitment and adequate resources if early gains are to be sustained.The joint global focal point for the police, justice and corrections areas in the rule of law in post-conflict and other crisis situations has made notable progress in providing rule of law assistance in post-conflict settings. The global focal point arrangement is driven both by a common vision and the actual requirements of field missions; it brings together the United Nations system to leverage resources, draw on comparative advantages and avoid duplication of efforts for the common objective of strengthening the rule of law.The ad hoc tribunals and United Nations-assisted tribunals have continued to contribute to combating impunity and promoting accountability for the most serious crimes. In September 2013, the Appeals Chamber of the Special Court for Sierra Leone upheld the conviction of the former President of Liberia, Charles Taylor, for aiding and abetting and planning the commission of international crimes. In 2013, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda brought to a close its substantive cases at the trial level, marking an important step towards its forecast closure in the near future. The International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia continued proceedings in major trials of senior political and military figures. The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia continued trial proceedings against the surviving senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge, while the Special Tribunal for Lebanon worked towards the commencement of the trial phase of its major proceedings to date, which ultimately opened in January 2014.The United Nations has continued to promote accountability for serious crimes of international concern and advocate the universal ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The Court issued its third judgement, in which it convicted a former leader of a rebel group in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Germain Katanga, on four counts of war crimes and one count of a crime against humanity.War crimes, crimes against humanity, genocide and other gross violations of human rights that constitute serious crimes under international law undermine the very foundations of the rule of law at both the international and national levels. While the International Criminal Court was established to investigate and prosecute these crimes, it is Member States that retain the primary responsibility to do so. For that reason, we continue to accord high priority to activities in support of strengthening national capacity to combat impunity for those crimes, in line with obligations under international human rights, humanitarian and refugee law, and to provide remedies and reparations to the victims. The Organization has continued to support the efforts of Member States to strengthen the legal regime for oceans, as reflected in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Oceans have featured prominently in the work of the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals and during the preparatory work for the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States. The Organization has also been requested to support important regional initiatives such as the 2050 Africa’s Integrated Maritime Strategy, which was adopted in February 2014.F.	Promotion of justice and international lawThe past year was a landmark year for the promotion of justice and international law. The declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the national and international levels, adopted in September 2012, affirmed that rule of law means that all persons, institutions and entities, public and private, including the State itself, are accountable to just, fair and equitable laws and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law. The declaration also cemented the centrality of the rule of law to the work of the Organization across the three pillars of peace and security, development and human rights. The United Nations provided rule of law assistance to more than 150 Member States in the past year. Through the ad hoc tribunals and the United Nations-backed tribunals, we continued the important work of promoting accountability for serious crimes of international concern. The Special Tribunal for Lebanon indicted four individuals allegedly involved in the attack that killed the former Prime Minister of Lebanon, Rafiq Hariri, and 22 others and issued arrest warrants for them. As efforts to locate and arrest the four accused have not been successful to date, the Special Tribunal will proceed to try them in absentia. The Residual Special Court for Sierra Leone will commence functioning upon the closure of the Special Court. The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia are working on a second trial, involving two of the four surviving senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge regime. The Extraordinary Chambers however face significant funding challenges that could jeopardize the judicial proceedings. It is imperative that both the Government of Cambodia and Member States live up to their commitments to support the Extraordinary Chambers. The International Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda moved closer to finishing their cases and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals started operations at Arusha in July 2012 and at The Hague in July 2013. It is crucial for international justice to be, and to be seen as, absolutely impartial if its reconciliation purposes are to be fully realized. The United Nations continued to cooperate with the International Criminal Court pursuant to the Relationship Agreement between the two entities. I encouraged Member States to ratify the Rome Statute and its amendments and worked closely with the African Union to encourage all African Union members to accept the International Criminal Court as the centrepiece of the international criminal justice system. There are currently 122 States parties to the Rome Statute. Seven of those States have ratified the amendment on the crime of aggression. In the reporting period, the Prosecutor opened investigations into war crimes in Mali, the eighth country situation for the Court. United Nations operations and offices in Mali have been consulted by and have provided preliminary information to the Prosecutor. A court-wide memorandum of understanding between the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire and the Court was concluded in June. The Organization has provided logistical and other forms of assistance to the Court to the extent that this was consistent with the mandate of the particular United Nations operation or office. F.	Promotion of justice and international lawThroughout the past year, the Organization nurtured conditions for the respect of the rule of law through its focus on combating impunity and strengthening accountability. It responded to the global demand for its rule of law expertise with interventions in more than 150 countries, and significant work is ongoing in peace operations with rule of law mandates. For example in Côte d’Ivoire as of January 2012, with the support of the United Nations, all 37 courts and 19 (out of 33) prisons had reopened after the post-election crisis, including the main prison in Abidjan. In South Sudan, joint United Nations efforts supported the extension of justice and policing services into Jonglei State. In 2011, mobile courts delivered 217 judgements relating to sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with the support of the United Nations and other international partners. In Kenya, the United Nations assisted with the drafting of implementing legislation for the new Kenyan Constitution.The Organization provided support to transitional justice processes in more than 20 countries worldwide. For instance, in 2011, support to the Truth, Justice and Reconciliation Commission of Togo was instrumental in helping the Commission to hold over 400 hearings. The reparations programmes in Sierra Leone, supported through the Peacebuilding Fund, have conducted community reparations events and delivered partial benefits to 20,000 of the 32,000 registered victims.The United Nations also continued to promote accountability for international crimes and advocate for further ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The first judgement of the Court, in the Lubanga case, constitutes an important step in ensuring the accountability of those responsible for international crimes.The United Nations-established and United Nations-assisted criminal tribunals continue to contribute to combating impunity and bringing about an age of accountability. The International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda are on course to finish their trials. The transfer of cases from the latter Tribunal to Rwanda will greatly facilitate progress in this regard.The Special Court for Sierra Leone convicted Charles Taylor, the former President of Liberia, of planning, aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity. This first conviction of a former Head of State by an international criminal tribunal since Nuremberg is a historic moment for international criminal justice.The mandate of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon was due to expire on29 February 2012. Since its work was not completed, its mandate was extended for an additional period of three years to enable it to conduct proceedings against the four persons it has indicted.The Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia completed their first case, convicting Kaing Guek Eav (alias Duch) of crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, and, on appeal, extended his sentence from 35 years to life imprisonment. The Chambers have also started their second case, against the four most senior surviving members of the Khmer Rouge regime.Further to my report on civilian capacity in the aftermath of conflict (A/66/311-S/2011/527), I have established an arrangement of global focal points for the areas of justice, police and corrections to enable the Organization to deliver more accountable and predictable capacities in these areas.I look forward to the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the rule of law at the opening of its sixty-seventh session with the hope that it will establish new and innovative mechanisms to strengthen the rule of law at the national and international levels.