B. Maintenance of international peace and security  Context59. During 2018, challenging global trends underscored the need for multilateral action to prevent conflict and to keep and sustain peace. After decades of decline, the resurgence of conflict continued. Wars, violence and persecution uprooted nearly 71 million people. An increased number of locations experienced violence, and the number of conflict actors proliferated, with dire implications for civilians. Conflicts were often regional and, despite some progress, terrorism and violent extremism persisted.60. More generally, poor governance and unequal access to opportunity continued to fuel discontent in societies. Hard-earned governance gains are put at risk and the space for inclusive politics continues to shrink, creating the potential for instability. Elections, if not inclusive and peaceful, sometimes served as triggers for violence. While technological progress brought about benefits, it also created disruptions. 61. The year also marked the seventieth anniversary of United Nations peacekeeping. The context in which peacekeeping operates today has changed dramatically since 1948. Many locations in which the Security Council now mandates peacekeeping missions face protracted crises with multiple adversaries, stalled peace processes, organized crime and attacks from violent extremists or terrorists.62. To successfully respond to such complex trends, the world needs inclusive political processes, coordinated global responses and effective multilateral institutions. 63. In the challenging environment of 2018, the global community also made progress. The rapprochement between Eritrea and Ethiopia transformed political dynamics in the Horn of Africa. The ceasefire agreement for Hudaydah port gave new impetus to ending the crisis in Yemen. A peace agreement brought renewed hope to South Sudan and the Central African Republic. Iraq and its partners completed operations against Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). Many electoral processes, from Madagascar to Maldives, resulted in peaceful transfers of power. The agreement between Greece and North Macedonia reaffirmed optimism that protracted conflicts and disputes can be resolved. 64. In support of multilateral action, Member States also agreed to reform the Secretariat’s peace and security pillar. And more than 150 States endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations as part of the Initiative on Action for Peacekeeping. This multi-year initiative now constitutes the United Nations core agenda for fostering peacekeeping as one of the most effective tools for maintaining international peace and security.  Key objectives65. Based on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the mandates of the Security Council and General Assembly, the United Nations supports Member States through major programmes on international peace and security. Through its political affairs, peacebuilding and peacekeeping programmes, the United Nations assists in the prevention, management and peaceful resolution of conflicts. Following recent reforms, those programmes are now more closely integrated to deliver an effective “whole-of-pillar” approach. In partnership with national stakeholders, regional organizations and contributors, the Organization also provides a range of other solutions to help foster international peace and security.66. In addition, the United Nations pursues dedicated programmes to tackle violence against children, address sexual violence in conflict, protect children in armed conflict and prevent sexual exploitation and abuse in the Organization. It also maintains a programme on the prevention of genocide.  Key outcomes and results  Prevention, management and resolution of conflictsHighlight: cooperation between the African Union and the United Nations in peace and securityIn December 2018, the African Union and the United Nations signed a joint declaration outlining the guiding principles for their cooperation in responding to conflict and crisis situations in Africa, including collaboration with African Union peace support operations. The agreement is part of increasing collaboration between the two organizations.67. In several situations during the year, the United Nations helped to prevent conflict or defuse tension. In Madagascar, for example, it worked in coordination with the African Union and other partners to help resolve disagreements ahead of the presidential election. Collective engagement contributed to the formation of a consensus Government and a largely peaceful presidential election and subsequent handover of power. In Somalia, the United Nations and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development worked to contain tensions between Puntland and “Somaliland”. In Mali, United Nations good offices – in collaboration with the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States – were instrumental in preventing escalation during the first presidential election held since the signing of the 2015 peace agreement. To help resolve the protracted situation in Western Sahara, the United Nations helped to convene the first meeting of the parties in six years. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the stabilizing influence of the peacekeeping mission contributed to presidential elections that led to the country’s first peaceful transfer of power.Highlight: innovation and a surge of diplomacy. In 2018, the United Nations collaborated with the Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue on a toolkit for digital technologies and mediation in armed conflict, which helps United Nations teams to explore the risks and benefits of digital technologies in conflict analysis, engagement with the parties, inclusivity and strategic communications.68. The United Nations helped to broker several other agreements to foster peace. In Yemen, United Nations-led talks resulted in a ceasefire agreement for Hudaydah port, which created hope for alleviating the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. Following long-standing United Nations mediation, Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia signed a historic agreement to resolve a dispute on the name of the latter country, which is now known as North Macedonia. In the Central African Republic, the leadership of the African Union and the support of the United Nations mission were essential for a peace agreement with armed groups. In South Sudan, the peacekeeping mission provided critical support in the conclusion of a revitalized peace agreement between the parties. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations continued to call for the implementation of the September 2018 memorandum of understanding on Idlib to protect civilians and facilitate a credible political process.69. In all of those settings, the United Nations political presence on the ground has been instrumental in gaining hard-won progress. The Organization deployed more than 30 special political missions, offices or envoys in countries and regions of concern during the year, including large political missions in Afghanistan, Colombia, Iraq, Libya, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and the Middle East. In total, the United Nations engaged in more than 90 situations with early warning, analysis, good offices and mediation services to support Member States in preventing conflict and consolidating peace.70. In support of Security Council mandates, the United Nations also maintained 14 peacekeeping operations in 2018/19, in addition to its support office in Somalia. In total, Member States asked the United Nations to deploy or support 118,000 uniformed and 17,000 civilian personnel (A/73/776), a 10 per cent reduction from 2017/18 following the completion of the mission in Liberia and the transition to new configurations in the Darfur region of the Sudan and in Haiti. 71. Peacekeeping continued to represent the Organization’s largest investment of resources. In 2018/19, peacekeeping operations accounted for $7 billion in expenditure (or about half of the United Nations Secretariat’s total spending), nearly $1 billion less than in 2016/17. Every second civilian staff member served in peacekeeping operations, including in some of the world’s most difficult environments, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and South Sudan. Nearly 100 peacekeepers gave their lives in the line of duty in 2018.  Peacebuilding support72. Following the adoption of two landmark resolutions in 2016, the United Nations has focused on better serving nations in the goal of sustaining peace. In that context, it assists the Peacebuilding Commission and manages the Peacebuilding Fund to foster support for national efforts and enhance system-wide partnerships, including with the World Bank and other international financial institutions. Highlight: youth, peace and security. The issuance of “The missing peace: independent progress study on youth and peace and security” (see A/72/761-S/2018/86) marked a milestone for the youth, peace and security agenda. Underscoring the positive contribution of youth to sustaining peace, the study led to the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2419 (2018). A dedicated team will coordinate the inclusion of youth in policies and programmes across the United Nations system.73. For example, the United Nations worked with the Peacebuilding Commission to advance a revised strategy for addressing the root causes of the Sahel crisis, where terrorism and violent extremism have made it difficult to focus international attention on such core conflict drivers as weak development indicators, conflict over land and climate change. The Peacebuilding Fund invested more than $60 million to kick-start the strategy’s implementation. In total, the Fund approved $183 million in 2018 for projects in 40 countries to foster stability and sustain peace.  Protection of civilians74. The protection of civilians is at the heart of many United Nations mandates. In 2018/19, eight peacekeeping missions had a specific civilian protection task. To that end, civilian, military and police personnel collaborated, based on integrated strategies. In South Sudan, for example, they provided physical protection to 190,000 women, children and men at United Nations protection sites. Peacekeepers also helped to establish protective environments for many people elsewhere, including through the provision of assistance to authorities in Mali. In the eastern region of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, United Nations support led to a sustained reduction in threats against civilians. There, peacekeepers helped to capture 57 commanders of armed groups, hold 287 perpetrators of violence accountable and confirm more than 5,400 human rights violations. The United Nations mission also supported health workers in containing the spread of the Ebola virus.75. To help fill protection gaps across its missions, the United Nations worked with Member States to increase the pool of military personnel and equipment available for deployment. By the end of 2018, 270 pledges had been registered for more than 20 types of such capabilities from 86 Member States. For the first time, nine military units from five contributing countries reached the highest level of rapid deployment. Up to 2,300 of their troops are now available to deploy within 60 days.  Electoral assistance76. About 70 national elections and referendums were held across the globe in 2018. The United Nations provided capacity-development support to more than 50 Member States and 5 regional organizations on electoral processes and institutions. United Nations teams conducted more than 90 needs assessment and advisory missions. The Organization also directly assisted in the conduct of 18 elections. In Iraq, for example, it supported election preparations and provided advice on the recounting of votes. In Madagascar, United Nations and international engagement was instrumental in supporting electoral institutions. In Cameroon, the Organization assisted national institutions in organizing presidential elections, and in Armenia it supported the conduct of parliamentary elections.  Rule of law and security sector institutions77. United Nations support for rule of law and security institutions was integral to the mandates of 20 peacekeeping or political missions and in non-mission settings. A disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programme in the Republic of the Congo, for example, contributed to a successful ceasefire agreement. In Burkina Faso and the Gambia, the United Nations provided advice on how to develop national security policies. In 18 countries and territories, United Nations support for the removal of mines and other explosive hazards helped to increase safety and facilitate aid efforts. In the Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations also continued to support national authorities in investigating and prosecuting perpetrators of serious crimes. Across all field missions, more than 10,000 United Nations police officers helped to protect civilians, prevent crime and build local policing capacity with community-oriented approaches.  Policy, evaluation and training78. In the past year, the United Nations put significant effort into policy development, evaluation and training. Since late 2017, for example, the Organization completed eight independent and externally led reviews of peacekeeping missions. Those top-to-bottom reviews examined all aspects of field operations and focused on ways to better deliver on mandates. Together with the report of Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, who was tasked with inspecting peacekeeping fatalities and injuries due to violent acts, the reviews helped to advance action. For example, United Nations teams developed and piloted a comprehensive performance assessment system, which will be fully rolled out by 2020.   Security Council affairs79. The Security Council held more than 400 meetings and consultations, considered 1,200 documents and adopted 54 resolutions and more than 200 decisions in 2018. United Nations teams provided Secretariat services for the Council, supported its subsidiary bodies (including 14 sanctions committees) and contributed research and training. The Organization also began tracking women’s participation in Council meetings to help advance female voices in global decision-making.  Violence against children, children and armed conflict, sexual violence in conflict and victims’ rights80. To drive global action on human rights violations often associated with conflict, the United Nations has three high-level representatives and advocates who in 2018 continued to build awareness, provide leadership, pursue advocacy, collect data and work with partners to facilitate action. In Côte d’Ivoire, for example, the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict worked with authorities on a zero-tolerance policy for sexual violence in the armed forces. In South Sudan, more than 900 children were released from armed groups, following advocacy on the part of the Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and system-wide collaboration. In support of children’s rights, the Special Representative on Violence against Children prepared a new report on protecting children from bullying to create a unique global platform for children’s voices. Furthermore, the Victims’ Rights Advocate helped to unite the leaders of more than 70 United Nations system entities and Governments in reaffirming measures to combat sexual exploitation and abuse in the Organization.   Outlook 81. In 2020, the ambitious reform of the United Nations peace and security pillar will enter its second year. The creation of a single regional structure at Headquarters for better internal collaboration on strategy and operations, as well as the Action for Peacekeeping agenda, are already bearing fruit. In the year ahead, the United Nations expects to address the full spectrum of peace and security matters, from conflict prevention to conflict resolution, peacekeeping and peacebuilding, in an even more coordinated, coherent and effective way.B.	Maintenance of international peace and security 1.	Prevention and sustaining peaceIn the spirit of the Charter’s determination “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war”, and in recognition of how far we have to go in meeting this goal, I have made the prevention of crises, vulnerabilities and conflicts my highest priority.Prevention is first and foremost about supporting efforts by national Governments and populations to make full use of the gamut of United Nations tools and programmes. Peace must be homegrown, but it can be effectively bolstered through coherent and strategic international support. To that end, I have conveyed to the United Nations system that prevention should permeate everything we do. It should cut across all pillars of the Organization’s work — within respective mandates and resources — and unite us for more effective delivery. To further ensure that we live up to this challenge, I have also articulated the idea of a prevention platform with the aim not of creating new structures or processes, but rather as an internal organizational, cultural and management tool designed to enable us to make maximum use of existing resources and capacities in support of a broader prevention agenda that is commensurate with the risks and challenges our Member States are facing. At the high-level meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, held in April 2018, Member States reiterated their support for precisely such a holistic and coordinated approach across the United Nations system in support of prevention. Many of the recently endorsed reforms will equip the Organization to provide more effective support to Member States across the spectrum of the prevention challenges they face. Through the creation of an integrated regional structure and a more effective positioning of the Peacebuilding Support Office as the hinge with the development pillar, the ongoing restructuring of the United Nations peace and security architecture aims to achieve coordination across the three pillars of peace and security, sustainable development and human rights in support of prevention. The reform of the United Nations development system will enable us to make more concerted progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, recognizing that the implementation of these Goals is the most effective contribution we can make to prevention. Sustaining peace is relevant to all the United Nations peace and security tools and entails an emphasis on partnerships, national ownership and recognition of the interlinkages of the United Nations work. I am heartened by the support of Member States for this vision.2.	Adapting tools to new conflictsOur missions on the ground remain critical tools in preventing conflict and sustaining peace: there are 14 peacekeeping operations, one operation supporting the African Union in Somalia and 38 special political missions currently deployed around the world.During the past year, peacekeeping’s strong track record was demonstrated by the successful conclusion of the missions in Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia, as well as the transition to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, a smaller peacekeeping mission in that country with a two-year exit strategy. On the basis of these experiences, we are strengthening our internal arrangements to ensure that transitions from large peacekeeping operations to other forms of United Nations presence, including tailored country team configurations, allow host nations to sustain gains already achieved.Despite recent successes, our peacekeeping missions are increasingly operating in deteriorating security environments encompassing asymmetric threats, transnational organized crime and regionalized conflicts, without clear trajectories for political progress, increasing the toll on our military, police and civilian peacekeepers, 131 of whom died in service in the past year. Our operations are adapting to better perform in these complex environments. As a result of the report of Lieutenant General (Retired) Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz on peacekeeping fatalities, many missions are implementing specific action plans designed to better protect peacekeepers while maintaining their ability to carry out their mandate, including on the protection of civilians. The response to security threats to our peacekeepers must, however, be set in a broader context, one in which many missions are now asked to implement their tasks in the absence of viable political processes. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, technical progress has not been matched by political progress on the political agreement of 31 December 2016, leading me to recommend to the Security Council adjustments to the posture, priorities and sequencing of the tasks of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in that country. Similarly, a resolution in respect of Abyei, a border region disputed by the Sudan and South Sudan, remains elusive. I have proposed to the Security Council an expansion of the political engagement of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, while recommending operational changes designed to reduce the potential for escalation and pave the way for renewed political dialogue.Protection of civilians remains a significant challenge. Children continue to be increasingly and disproportionately affected by armed conflict. In 2017, following changing conflict dynamics and the intensification of armed clashes, there were at least 6,000 verified violations against children by government forces and over 15,000 by a range of non-State armed groups. Violations perpetrated included recruitment and use, sexual violence, killing and maiming, abductions, attacks on schools and hospitals and denial of humanitarian assistance. Surges in the number of abductions point to a sustained reliance on children for combat and support duties. In response to high levels of conflict-related sexual violence, the Organization has increasingly focused on prevention through dialogue, addressing conflict-related sexual violence in peace processes, and addressing impunity. In response to these complex environments, United Nations peacekeeping missions have developed new tools to implement protection mandates across the whole mission. A new framework on accountability for senior leadership lays out clearer responsibilities for both civilian and uniformed personnel. Recognizing that protection is fundamentally about prevention, missions have strengthened analysis and early warning of threats to civilians, as well as innovative community engagement and local conflict mediation efforts. The United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo has developed a comprehensive approach focused first on de-escalation and resolution of conflicts, while shifting its posture from protection by presence (being there) to protection through projection (taking action). Acknowledging that partnerships are an essential part of prevention, the protection of civilians sites in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, which continue to host and protect more than 200,000 internally displaced persons, remain an example of close coordination with humanitarian partners.To respond to the challenges facing peacekeeping, on 28 March 2018, I introduced the Action for Peacekeeping initiative at the Security Council high-level debate on peacekeeping. I called for all peacekeeping stakeholders, including the Secretariat, the Security Council, troop- and police-contributing countries, financial contributors, host countries and regional organizations to renew their commitment to peacekeeping by identifying ways for all partners to better support peacekeeping. We plan to capture our respective and mutual commitments in a declaration that Member States will be invited to support later in 2018.For its part, the Secretariat must better fulfil its responsibilities to peacekeeping stakeholders and to peacekeepers in the field. By means of an action plan to improve the security of peacekeepers, we are ensuring that personnel are better trained and equipped to face high-risk environments, including by improvised explosive device risk mitigation against asymmetric threats where adversaries to peace have greater fire power. We are also taking steps to improve performance. Through several United Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerials, we have received new military and police pledges, which are being managed by way of a new Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System website. Triangular partnerships between Member States with expertise, troop- and police-contributing countries and the Secretariat have also enhanced critical skills of our operations in engineering, signals and command and control. Thanks to these advances, we can better fit units to operating environments and identify opportunities to fill training and capability gaps.Special political missions remain a flexible and versatile modality of response to a wide range of situations. Ranging from special envoys and regional offices to country-specific missions, they share a common purpose — to support political processes and work with partners to secure sustainable peace. Many of these missions — in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya and Somalia, for example — are deployed in challenging security contexts and, as do my Special Envoys for Syria and Yemen, carry responsibility for complex peace processes amid ongoing high levels of violence. Others, especially in the three regional offices for Central Africa, Central Asia and West Africa and the Sahel, often serve as “first responders” to risks of instability and conflict. Special political missions and envoys routinely make use of a range of United Nations mediation capabilities and expertise, including the Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers. My High-level Advisory Board on Mediation is a new resource also available across the range of our activities.The regionalization of conflict is one of the most challenging trends we face today. The Middle East, for example, is characterized by several interconnected conflicts with enormous humanitarian consequences far beyond the region itself. The Middle East peace process remains stalled and the situation in Gaza is deteriorating. Against the regional backdrop, Iraq and its partners successfully completed operations against ISIL and the Organization supported major stabilization efforts in the liberated areas. Libya and Yemen are both at critical junctures. Having appointed a new Special Representative, I launched the United Nations action plan on Libya in September 2017. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya, based in Tunis since 2011, has adopted a bottom-up approach to supporting the political process, while also planning for the full mission to return to Libya in 2019. In Yemen too, a recently appointed Special Envoy has brought renewed impetus to the political process. Despite recent intensification in the conflict, the Special Envoy presented to the Security Council in June 2018 elements of a negotiation framework, which he hopes will allow for a resumption of peace talks.Given the cross-border nature of security threats such as transnational crime and drug trafficking, regional, national and subnational approaches are all essential to the United Nations engagements in much of Africa. I will continue to advocate for integrated approaches to addressing security, development and humanitarian challenges, including through the work of my regional offices. I especially recognize the efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission and the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel to mobilize relevant stakeholders to advance implementation of an integrated strategy for the Sahel. I continue to emphasize the enormous potential of credible, inclusive and peaceful elections. Together with our partners, notably the Economic Community of West African States, we supported the successful holding of elections in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The strengthening of the United Nations Office in Nairobi in 2017 improved our capacity to support regional organizations, national institutions, and local peace architectures. More recently, I appointed a Special Adviser on Madagascar to help to facilitate a national dialogue process and create a conducive environment for the upcoming elections. I welcome the historic agreement between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on the long-standing name issue, reached under the auspices of my Personal Envoy, which demonstrates the value of perseverance and quiet diplomacy. My Special Envoy for Burundi supported the East African Community-led inter-Burundi Dialogue. My Special Envoy for the Great Lakes Region has launched a joint mechanism with the Regional Oversight Mechanism for the Democratic Republic of the Congo to address the repatriation of disarmed foreign combatants. Despite continuing challenges, the United Nations has also contributed significantly to the promising peace process in Colombia. My visit in January 2018 signalled the Organization’s commitment to continue working together with Colombia, including through the complementary work of the United Nations Verification Mission established in September 2017 and the United Nations country team. In Myanmar, the world is witnessing its fastest growing refugee crisis, following the violence of August 2017 in Rakhine State. We must implement the joint response plan agreed to by Myanmar and the United Nations and address the underlying causes, including the issue of citizenship for the Rohingya, to prevent further violence. My newly appointed Special Envoy made her first visit to Myanmar in June 2018.3.	Effective partnerships and collaborationsEffective partnerships amplify the United Nations efforts and increase collective chances at success. At the regional level, we have institutionalized our partnership with the African Union, including through a Joint Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security set up in 2017. The United Nations Support Office in Somalia has continued to provide support to the African Union Mission in Somalia, the regional peacekeeping mission operated by the African Union with the approval of the United Nations. However, region-led peace operations in Africa lack sustained and predictable financing, and I encourage Member States to consider my proposals in this regard. Following my recent visit to the headquarters of the European Union, I look forward to finalizing a framework document in September that sets out our organizations’ joint priorities to support peace operations and encourage prevention. Partnerships with other regional actors continue to move forward and, on 12 and 13 June 2018, I convened a high-level dialogue with the heads of 20 regional and other organizations to discuss key strategic issues. We must also continue to work with international financial institutions. The United Nations-World Bank study, Pathways for Peace, is the first endeavour of its kind and the United Nations is working closely with the Bank on its recommendations. The Partnership Framework for Crisis-Affected Situations that I signed with the President of the World Bank in April 2017 explicitly shifts our collaboration from crisis response and recovery to risk reduction and prevention. The Strategic Partnership Framework agreement with the World Bank that we signed in May 2018 further aligns our support to countries in implementing the Sustainable Development Goals and climate and post-crisis humanitarian responses.4.	Women and peace and securityThe women and peace and security agenda remains a priority. The United Nations continues to make progress in enhancing women’s participation in peacekeeping, and approximately 11 per cent of staff officers and observers are female, nearing the target of 15 per cent by 2018. The United Nations also works to promote women’s meaningful inclusion in peace processes and to promote gender sensitive agreements, including by developing a close working relationship with Member State regional and national networks of women mediators. With regard to financing of the agenda, 36 per cent of Peacebuilding Fund support went to programmes intended to further gender equality, surpassing the 15 per cent minimum called for by the Secretary-General in 2009. As 15 per cent has been adopted as a minimum standard by a growing number of Member States and other organizations, other United Nations entities working on peacebuilding, recovery, or countering violent extremism still have more work to do to track their investments on gender equality and reach this minimum threshold. Equally, women continue to be underrepresented in decision-making in peacekeeping, as well as local and national peace processes, making further efforts on the participation front imperative.5.	Youth and peace and securityThe Security Council’s recent focus on youth and peace and security, including its open debate in April and its adoption of a resolution in June, highlights the important role that young people play in preventing conflict and sustaining peace. The recently finalized United Nations strategy on youth prioritizes supporting young people as catalysts for peace and security, sustainable development, human rights and humanitarian action. This includes the promotion of an enabling environment that promotes intercultural and interreligious dialogue, is conducive to young people’s actions, and recognizes their important contributions in informal and formal processes, including in mediation, conflict resolution and peace processes.6.	Strengthening United Nations support to national and intergovernmental processesEffective governance and the rule of law are important for sustainable peace, and we continue to enhance institutional support efforts. In Liberia, an improved legal framework helped to resolve electoral disputes peacefully following the elections held in October 2017. Security sector reform has enhanced the security of States and citizens, for example in the Central African Republic where the United Nations mission supported the development of a national strategy on these issues. United Nations police continue to support national police services to better protect populations, while civil affairs staff work to support local reconciliation. Similarly, the efforts of the United Nations Mine Action Service have supported stabilization through its coordination in clearing explosive contamination from key infrastructure, such as the Qusur water treatment plant in Iraq, which now provides clean water to 300,000 residents.Improving Organization-wide collaboration in support of national processes is an ongoing priority. A joint programme between the United Nations Development Programme and the Department of Political Affairs assisted more than 60 countries in 2017, largely by deploying peace and development advisers to support resident coordinators in building national capacities for conflict prevention. Despite an increasingly challenging funding environment, Member State demand for United Nations electoral assistance remains consistently strong, and United Nations support is currently being provided in some 60 countries.With regard to intergovernmental processes, in 2017 the Security Council significantly expanded and strengthened the sanctions regime on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which may have contributed to bringing about the current dialogue for peace on the peninsula. The Council also introduced sanctions on Mali. In addition, the Security Council undertook five missions to enhance its understanding of realities on the ground. The Secretariat has moreover supported the Council’s functioning and performance by providing more accessible, comprehensive and accurate data on its work. Not least, we must redouble efforts to find a peaceful resolution of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, including through the United Nations support to the General Assembly Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. The work of the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund remains invaluable and I have called for the revitalization of the Peacebuilding Support Office and a quantum leap in funding for the Peacebuilding Fund. The Commission’s engagement with the Security Council has catalysed international attention and support, which, for example, resulted in $1.9 billion pledged to support the Gambia, while the Fund assisted Liberia in operationalizing its peacebuilding plan. The Peacebuilding Fund programmed a record-setting $157 million for 82 projects in 31 countries in 2017. B.	Maintenance of international peace and security 1.	Adapting to new conflicts Today’s conflicts pose complex challenges for the Organization. For us to be better prepared and effectively respond to these demands, we must reinvigorate our approach to include: (a)	Fortifying our capacity to build political solutions to existing threats and emerging challenges; (b)	Ensuring that State and institution-building strengthen legitimacy through inclusion and attention to grievances; (c)	Upholding the Organization’s impartiality; (d)	Making effective use of the Secretary-General’s good offices through mediation support. Figure II United Nations peacekeeping and special political missions as at 30 June 2017(Abbreviations on following page)Abbreviations used in figure IIUnited Nations peace operations are among our strongest tools for maintaining peace and containing conflict. There are currently 16 peacekeeping operations and 36 special political missions around the world (see figure II). The vast majority of our staff serve in volatile security environments. In peacekeeping contexts, the protection of civilians has become a central mandate, which can also place United Nations personnel in danger. In 2016, 117 military, police and civilian peacekeepers died in service, while 7 United Nations civilian personnel serving in peacekeeping and special political missions lost their lives in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Mali, Somalia and the Sudan. By 30 June 2017, an additional 41 United Nations personnel had died in service.United Nations peace operations: facts and figures as at 30 June 2017A. Peacekeeping operations	There are currently 112,303 United Nations peacekeeping personnel in 16 operations, comprising:	•	Uniformed personnel: 95,553	◦	Troops: 80,067	◦	Police: 11,982	◦	Military observers: 1,543	◦	Staff officers: 1,961	•	Civilian personnel: 15,153 (as at 28 February 2017)	◦	International: 5,004	◦	Local: 10,149	•	United Nations Volunteers: 1,597	•	Countries contributing uniformed personnel: 127	Fatalities in peacekeeping operations and special political missions in the reporting year: 165	Fatalities in all peace operations and special political missions since 1948: 3,599	Financial resources approved for peace operations, 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017: $7.87 billion	B. Special political missions	There are currently more than 8,000 personnel in 36 special political missions, primarily civilian, some military guards, military observers and police, comprising:	•	13 field-based missions	•	10 special envoys and advisers	•	13 sanctions panels and monitoring groups	In the reporting period, the Electoral Assistance Division deployed over 60 electoral missions as well as missions conducted to provide capacity-building support to regional organizations.		The United Nations must go beyond reacting to events and build anticipatory relationships with national and regional partners to prevent conflict. Prevention requires addressing the root causes of conflict across the three pillars of the United Nations: peace and security, human rights and inclusive development. To bring us closer to a United Nations that is agile and able to deliver results in complex environments, I initiated a review of the peace and security architecture of the Secretariat. I strongly endorse the central message of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations to place political solutions at the centre of our work. We are also breaking new ground with the creation of the Office of Counter-Terrorism (General Assembly resolution 71/291). 2.	Women, peace and security The women, peace and security agenda is critical for preventing conflict and shaping more effective responses to today’s crises, and the United Nations must lead by example. I am dedicated to ensuring effective follow-up to the gender-specific recommendations emanating from previous reviews and the sustaining peace resolutions of 2016. I am currently urgently looking at how to increase the number of women appointed in United Nations-led or co-led mediation processes and in peacekeeping and special political missions (see figure III). The United Nations publication Guidance on Gender and Inclusive Mediation Strategies was issued during the reporting period to offer practical strategies for more inclusive and gender-responsive mediation. At a conference on United Nations peacekeeping, held in London in September 2016, more than 60 Member States pledged to increase women’s participation at all levels of peacekeeping operations. Women currently make up 26 per cent of head of mission and deputy head of mission positions, the highest proportion ever achieved, but we are still far short of gender parity.	Figure III Percentage of uniformed women in peacekeeping, 2009-20163.	Youth, peace and securityRecent Security Council resolutions have spearheaded a growing focus on harnessing young people’s contribution to sustaining peace. The ongoing progress study on youth, peace and security is documenting the positive contribution of young women and men through in-depth consultations with youth. Further research needs to be done to better understand the implications of technology on growing youth unemployment and how technology can be harnessed in youth education.4.	Use of my good offices: preventive diplomacy and mediationI am fully engaged in offering support in seeking peaceful solutions to disputes through the use of my good offices. Once the looming risk of violence emerges, my special envoys and representatives are often among the first responders. Working regularly with regional actors, my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel played a critical role during the post-election crisis in the Gambia in support of mediation that resulted in former President Jammeh’s decision to cede power in a peaceful manner. My Special Representative heading the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia is committed to offering his good offices to facilitate negotiations on transnational water resources. My Special Representative for Central Africa continues to promote inclusive political dialogue and provide good offices in Gabon, the Congo, Chad and Cameroon. The peacekeeping operation for the Central African Republic is working with the African Union to implement the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, including measures to prevent intercommunal violence. I have called upon India and Pakistan to find a peaceful solution to tensions and have reiterated the availability of my good offices to assist in any way necessary. I also rely upon a pool of readily deployable experts at Headquarters and the Standby Team of Senior Mediation Advisers. Their technical knowledge has provided extensive support not only for my envoys but also for regional and national initiatives. I have also personally exercised my good offices in several contexts since my appointment and intend to continue to do so. Engagement in preventing and ending grave violations against children can constitute an entry point for dialogue and mediation. State and non-State parties have pursued commitments to end grave violations against children. Together with the United Nations Children’s Fund and others, the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict supports the implementation of the May 2016 agreement between the Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army on the separation of children associated with the armed group, as an observer and guarantor. Working with my Special Representative, the Democratic Republic of the Congo committed to making progress in preventing the recruitment of children into the country’s armed forces. 5.	Democratic transitions and electionsThe importance of accompanying electoral processes with preventive diplomacy was demonstrated over the year. In Ghana, the good offices of my Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel were critical in bringing about a peaceful denouement to electoral tensions. Coordination with regional and international actors, particularly the Economic Community of West African States, was central to avoiding violence. In Afghanistan, the United Nations supported key reforms to strengthen the electoral process, including the election of three women to the election commission. The conclusion of the electoral process in Haiti in early 2017, with the support of the United Nations, paved the way for the return to constitutional normalcy and political stability. In contrast to these successes, political tensions rose in the Democratic Republic of the Congo as the expiry of President Kabila’s second term approached in December 2016. The peacekeeping mission mandate was refocused to support the protection of civilians and the implementation of the agreement brokered by the Conference épiscopale nationale du Congo, made up of national Christian leaders. Significant support from the international community will continue to be required to allow the organization of credible and peaceful elections by the end of 2017.6.	Crisis managementUnited Nations peace operations are increasingly deployed earlier than previously to prevent, contain or help end violence. The imperative to prevent the further escalation of violence may dictate the need for the presence of United Nations missions even when a viable political solution is weak or absent. Experience has demonstrated that no matter how well equipped or robust, peacekeeping cannot effectively fulfil protection of civilian mandates without a political strategy or plan supported by the parties and by regional and international stakeholders. This was apparent across a number of peacekeeping theatres. The United Nations mission in the Central African Republic has intervened on many occasions to prevent communal violence from spiralling out of control, averting major massacres. The mission in South Sudan has struggled to protect civilians against a backdrop of intensified hostilities between the parties to the conflict and an array of crippling obstructions erected by national authorities. The deployment of a regional protection force has generated minimal progress in improving the situation because of a lack of government cooperation. Nevertheless, while falling short in certain serious instances, the United Nations mission is protecting and sustaining hundreds of thousands of people every day. Multiple discussions within and statements by the Security Council, the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development have failed so far to produce a clear way forward for a cessation of hostilities and a revitalization of the political process. Ensuring that peacekeepers have the right capabilities and the political will to protect civilians is critical. In Mali, delays in generating critical military assets have limited the United Nations mission’s ability to fulfil the robust and proactive mandate authorized in June 2016. While the mission has pursued tireless efforts through mediation to support the implementation of the peace agreement, protracted disagreements and a lack of trust between signatory parties has stalled progress, further contributing to the deteriorating situation. A framework to strengthen commitment and better deliver on civilian protection mandates is under development.Achieving negotiated settlements during full-blown hostilities, taking into account complex local, regional and international interests, has proven challenging in mission and non-mission settings alike. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the inability to reach agreement has allowed violence and human suffering to fester for far too long. Negotiations for a political transition in the Syrian Arab Republic resumed under United Nations auspices and were facilitated by my Special Envoy in January 2017. Yet on the ground, relentless assaults on civilians continue, causing massive displacements that threaten stability in the region and beyond. In Yemen, despite the efforts of my Special Envoy, the parties have not returned to the negotiating table. In Afghanistan, my Special Representative continues to support reconciliation initiatives within a prolonged humanitarian crisis. Progress towards a political solution in Burundi has been similarly slow, owing largely to the reluctance of parties to engage without preconditions. 7.	Sustaining peaceGeneral Assembly and Security Council resolutions on sustaining peace have expanded the notion of peacebuilding. Previously seen as a purely post-conflict endeavour, peacebuilding aims to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of violence in order to sustain peace throughout a conflict cycle. My forthcoming report on sustaining peace will set out the implications of this holistic approach, including links to broader reforms. My prevention platform will be a central element and will support a more integrated, strategic and coherent approach among the three pillars of United Nations work: peace and security, development and human rights. We are operationalizing the concept of sustaining peace, where appropriate. The Secretariat is supporting the Peacebuilding Commission’s working methods to bring together Member States, regional and subregional organizations, civil society and international financial institutions to address a broad range of country-specific, cross-border and regional situations. Immediately after the peaceful resolution of the post-electoral crisis in the Gambia, a United Nations assessment mission, a visit by the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and the quick disbursement of grants from the Peacebuilding Fund were critical in ensuring support to the new Government’s efforts to consolidate stability. In Liberia, at the request of the Security Council, the United Nations developed a peacebuilding plan through a tripartite United Nations, European Union and World Bank mechanism to direct the transition out of peacekeeping. In the Central African Republic and Mali, the United Nations began developing community engagement strategies to build local capacity and prevent and mitigate intercommunal tension and conflict. Steady progress in Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti and Liberia has paved the way for the planned drawdown of peacekeeping operations in those countries in 2017-2018. An attempted army mutiny in Côte d’Ivoire in May 2017 signalled that the Government must address grievances both within the Ivorian security sector and more broadly to sustain peace consolidation in the country. In Haiti, a smaller specialized peacekeeping operation will build on the work done by its predecessor in support of the rule of law. Nevertheless, the withdrawal of a mission does not mark the end of the road towards sustainable peace but rather the reconfiguration of the Organization’s presence.Fast, catalytic and risk-tolerant funding is crucial for sustaining peace. The Peacebuilding Fund maintained its support levels with the renewed commitment of 33 Member States at its pledging conference in September 2016. The Fund exceeded the United Nations-wide target to allocate at least 15 per cent to gender equality and women’s empowerment. It also expanded its role in financing cross-border and regional peacebuilding initiatives, launched the first United Nations dedicated funding stream on youth, peace and security, and for the first time directly funded civil society organizations.8.	PartnershipsWe stand a better chance of success if we join together to address potential crises and support communities in the pursuit of peace. I have, therefore, prioritized partnerships and signed an agreement in April 2017 with the Chairperson of the African Commission, formalizing joint mechanisms for regular consultation and cooperation at the strategic and working levels. The agreement covers the gamut of peace and security, from the establishment of a United Nations-African Union working group on conflict prevention to crisis management. In Somalia, Darfur, the Central African Republic and Mali, our cooperation with the African Union showcases a history of innovative and adapted solutions. I hope that my proposals on sustainable, predictable and flexible financing for African Union peace support operations mandated by the Council will receive favourable consideration by Member States. Such collaboration must be based on an understanding of comparative advantage and added value.Our partnerships are among the most valuable preventive tools of the United NationsEffective partnerships are among the most valuable preventive tools available to the United Nations, whether with Governments, non-governmental organizations or the private sector. In Central Asia, we are working closely with the Shanghai Cooperation Organization on a range of issues, including addressing the threats of terrorism, violent extremism and drug trafficking. In Southern Africa, the United Nations supported national mediation training conducted by the Southern African Development Community (SADC) in Lesotho ahead of the June 2017 elections, as a contribution to the broader SADC mediation effort. In Southeast Asia, the United Nations concluded a new plan of action with the Association of South-East Asian Nations, emphasizing a closer partnership for sustaining peace and preventive diplomacy and in economic and sociocultural affairs. In Europe, I am committed to supporting a peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine through the efforts of the Normandy Four, the Trilateral Contact Group and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.Our close cooperation with the European Union was further strengthened, particularly in Mali, the Central African Republic and Somalia, and we have worked together in key political processes across Africa and the Middle East. We have also focused on rapid deployment and security sector reform. In April 2017, the World Bank President and I signed an updated Partnership Framework for Crisis and Post-Crisis Situations, expanding the partnership to include collaboration in preventing violent conflict. We renewed our commitment to work together on development, humanitarian, political, security, peacebuilding and human rights challenges. To prevent conflict and sustain peace, we must assist countries in attaining the Sustainable Development GoalsTo prevent conflict and sustain peace, we must assist countries in attaining the Sustainable Development Goals. Yet the link between inclusive sustainable development and the prevention of violence is not well understood. A joint United Nations-World Bank flagship study on how development and political processes interact for the prevention of violence, the first of its kind, is under way and will examine the evidence on how grievances linked to inequality and exclusion increase the risk of violent conflict. B.	Maintenance of international peace and security The past year’s efforts to prevent, contain and resolve violent conflict reminded us afresh of the necessity of the United Nations. The safety and prosperity of future generations was jeopardized by the failure of political leaders to govern peacefully and equitably and with respect for the rule of law; the continued diversion of resources from development to the waging of war; alarming disregard by warring parties for international human rights and humanitarian law; and a failure to speak out consistently against violations or to hold perpetrators accountable for crimes committed. Atrocity crimes continued to be a regular occurrence. Children bore arms instead of school books. People fled their homes in larger numbers than ever before. The social fabric of entire regions was put at risk. These trends have had terrible consequences for civilians, including in the Middle East and parts of Africa. Consequently, the reporting period saw a surge in demand for United Nations efforts to prevent and manage conflict and to sustain peace. More peacekeepers were deployed than ever before in the Organization’s history. The demand for mediation support and good offices, including through special political missions, and the price tag for humanitarian assistance reached all-time highs. The unsustainability of this situation is clear. This heavy burden of conflict could be measured qualitatively as well as quantitatively, in the form of increasingly complex conflict dynamics and deteriorating operating environments. In Afghanistan, Iraq, Mali, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen, armed conflict continued to be intertwined with terrorism, with violent extremists exploiting national, regional and local vulnerabilities, including ethnic, religious, socioeconomic and political tensions. The rapid emergence of the so-called Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), or Daesh, reshaped the violent extremist landscape and amplified the already substantial threat posed by older extremist groups such as Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and Al-Shabaab. In the past six months alone, ISIL carried out, inspired, or claimed responsibility for terrorist attacks in Bangladesh, Belgium, Egypt, France, Germany, Indonesia, Lebanon, Pakistan, the Russian Federation, Turkey and the United States of America. There was also evidence that human-trafficking and migrant-smuggling groups were profiting from the movements of large numbers of refugees and migrants fleeing violence, persecution and disenfranchisement, exacerbating the suffering of those in search of safety and security. These trends complicated the task of United Nations mediators attempting to broker inclusive political solutions. Peace operations struggled to operate effectively in non-permissive environments with high levels of ongoing violence. That 43 peacekeepers were killed and 75 injured in malicious acts between 1 August 2015 and 31 May 2016 demonstrates that peacekeeping is a dangerous, and sometimes fatal, endeavour. United Nations personnel and programmes in both mission and non-mission settings, including those previously assessed as low risk, faced complex, diverse and multifaceted security threats, arising from armed conflicts, volatile post-conflict environments, terrorism, civil unrest, violent crime, political crisis, grave human rights violations, humanitarian emergencies and frequent natural disasters. The number of direct attacks against United Nations premises and vehicles increased. Forecasts indicate that the combination of armed conflict with violent extremism will continue to shape the global security landscape. The reporting period also saw important developments towards a more peaceful future, however. The adoption of Agenda 2030 and the three important peace and security reviews conducted in 2015 — on peace operations, on peacebuilding and on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) — gave us a road map for collective action to prevent and resolve conflict. Because an increasing proportion of the extreme poor live in conflict-affected countries and 125 million people require humanitarian assistance, the world will not be able to reach the Sustainable Development Goals in 2030 without greater efforts at working on conflict — that is, finding political solutions through inclusive political dialogue that addresses the drivers of conflict. Greater efforts at working in conflict will also be crucial — that is, strengthening the delivery of services in protracted crises in remote locations and reaching the marginalized. 1.	Conflict prevention and mediation The first and clearest priority, an unambiguous lesson of the reporting period, is that conflict prevention and mediation need to be brought back to the centre of all United Nations engagements. The conflicts in the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen as well as the crisis in Burundi demonstrate the need for more, not fewer, of these activities. The large movements of refugees and migrants around the world also underscored the need to address the root causes of these movements and the conflicts that prompt them. It was also the central appeal of the three important peace and security reviews conducted in 2015 — on peace operations, on peacebuilding and on Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Prevention is a responsibility under the Charter, one that must be shared by the United Nations, Member States, regional and subregional organizations, and civil society. I continued to offer my good offices and to undertake conflict prevention, preventive diplomacy and mediation efforts during the reporting period in a wide array of contexts. The United Nations led mediation efforts in some of the most difficult conflict settings, such as Libya, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. In other cases, it co-mediated with regional and subregional organizations, or supported initiatives led by those organizations. Throughout all this work, the United Nations insisted on the indispensable participation of women in peace processes and mediation. My Special Envoy for Syria convened several rounds of intra-Syrian negotiations to seek an end to the conflict through a political transition based on Security Council resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communiqué. Hopes for the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic tentatively improved with the cessation of hostilities on 27 February and an increase in humanitarian assistance, but progress remains slow and fragile. In Yemen, my Special Envoy continued efforts to promote a peaceful resolution of the conflict. The inter-Yemeni peace talks that commenced in April continue. While both sides have committed to reaching an agreement on an end to hostilities and a path towards the resumption of the political transition process, deep differences between the two sides remain. Ensuring the effective implementation of the agreement will require constructive engagement by all Yemeni parties, as well as strong regional support. Meanwhile, since the signing of the Libyan Political Agreement on 17 December 2015, some of the institutions envisaged, including the Presidency Council, have been formed. Efforts are now focused on broadening the basis of support for the agreement and for the bodies it created, as well as addressing the security situation, which remains a concern. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya is providing support to the Presidency Council and working to re-establish the Mission’s presence in Tripoli to enhance these efforts. In Burundi, the security situation remained precarious, owing to a pattern of politically motivated and targeted violence connected to the ongoing political crisis. The Security Council requested me to provide my good offices and technical and substantive support to the mediation process, led and facilitated by the East African Community, as endorsed by the African Union. In the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy, in close collaboration with my Special Representative for the Democratic Republic of the Congo, continued to support and monitor the implementation of national and regional commitments under the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework in coordination with regional and subregional partners. There was more encouraging news elsewhere. In Myanmar, the landmark elections of November 2015 transformed the country’s political landscape by bringing Aung San Suu Kyi and her party into power. As the new Government embarks on a national political dialogue process to unify the country, it faces major challenges in confronting entrenched attitudes, especially in Rakhine, and meeting the heightened expectations of its people. I shall continue to make my good offices available to Myanmar as it moves strenuously ahead to improve the lives of its peoples and make the peace process and future elections truly inclusive. In Colombia, the United Nations is preparing for the deployment of a special political mission, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2261 (2016), which will be responsible for the monitoring and verification of the laying down of arms, and be a part of the tripartite mechanism that will monitor and verify the definitive bilateral ceasefire and cessation of hostilities once the peace agreement is signed. In Cyprus, encouraging progress towards a comprehensive solution was made in the leaders-led negotiations facilitated by my Special Adviser. Beyond these specific good offices efforts, I continued to strengthen United Nations regional capacities and to better position the Organization to deal with rapidly deteriorating crises and tense political environments in non-mission settings. United Nations regional offices for West Africa and the Sahel, for Central Africa and for Central Asia continued to serve as highly effective “forward platforms” for conflict prevention. The strengthening of the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa is contributing to that Office’s ability to engage preventively in the region. Greater support was also provided to resident coordinators in non-mission settings, especially those facing tense political environments and rapidly deteriorating crisis contexts. I also continued strengthening our relationship with the World Bank. The joint financing initiative with the World Bank and the Islamic Development Bank announced in October 2015 in Lima is supporting countries in the Middle East and North Africa, including Lebanon and Jordan, which are bearing a disproportionate responsibility in hosting refugees from conflict, especially from the Syrian Arab Republic. Given the full range of challenges faced by these host countries, there is a clear conflict prevention dimension to this innovative approach. Finally, I launched a policy discussion in the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination on integrating conflict prevention and peacebuilding efforts into the Organization’s broader work to support the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Many of these efforts, however, were undertaken without meaningful regular budget resources. I regret that, during the reporting period, my case for bringing to an end the unsustainable reliance on extrabudgetary resources for vital prevention and mediation work did not meet more favour with Member States. I will continue to make the case at every opportunity. 2.	Peace operations The deployment of United Nations peace operations remained at its highest level in history during this reporting period. With nearly 125,000 uniformed and civilian personnel from more than 100 Member States deployed in 16 peacekeeping missions, and over 3,600 civilian staff working in 37 special political missions, the United Nations continued to make a tangible contribution to peace and security in many parts of the world. A number of countries hosting peacekeeping missions saw progress over the past year: the successful elections in Côte d’Ivoire confirmed that the country was moving firmly towards lasting peace and ready to conclude the peacekeeping phase of the United Nations engagement; a peace agreement signed in Mali sets out a new vision for governance and security in the north; and, in the Central African Republic, the Bangui Forum and the subsequent elections paved the way for a new phase in the country’s transition from conflict. Nevertheless, other missions, such as the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, continued to face a number of difficulties, including with regard to host government consent and cooperation. In South Sudan, the agreement of August 2015 faced numerous implementation difficulties stemming from the leaders’ inability to overcome their differences. With respect to Western Sahara, in March 2016 the Mission saw the bulk of its civilian staff expelled from Laayoune at the request of Morocco, resulting in unprecedented challenges to fully carrying out mandated activities. A growing number of peace operations faced extremely challenging operating environments classified as substantially, highly or extremely dangerous. Approximately 90 per cent of personnel in special political missions are working in countries experiencing high-intensity conflict. For example Afghanistan continued to endure higher casualties from a continuing conflict, a contracting economy with low growth and high unemployment, thereby fuelling migration flows, and a deepening of political divisions. My Special Representative provided support for peace and reconciliation initiatives at national and local levels. In Somalia, my Special Representative continued to work in close coordination with the Federal Government, regional leaders and international partners to harmonize views on key political processes such as the review of the Provisional Constitution and consultations on the 2016 electoral process. In Iraq, my Special Representative continued his good offices work with Iraqi leaders, civil society and others to promote a genuine and inclusive reconciliation process that reaches all levels of Iraqi society. Political dialogue, implementation of the Iraqi Prime Minister’s reform agenda, and addressing the economic and security situations all remain key requirements to ensure long-term stability in Iraq. Compounding these security challenges, several peacekeeping operations are also operating in remote locations. In Mali, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission faces a deadly and persistent threat from terrorist armed groups, and while it is widely agreed that peacekeeping operations should not engage in counter-terrorism activities, this case demonstrates the need to provide peacekeeping operations with the requisite capabilities to protect themselves and implement their mandates in complex asymmetric settings. On the support side, continued strides were made in the reporting period to take full advantage of technology to assist peace operations in implementing their mandates more effectively and safely and in making mission support more efficient and cost effective, and less labour intensive. There were further reductions in the spending and support costs per mission personnel and more than 70 per cent of mission personnel now benefit from one or more shared services arrangements. We also took significant steps to advance environmental issues in peacekeeping, developing a partnership with the United Nations Environment Programme for technical assistance and creating capacity to coordinate the overall environmental footprint of operations, in the energy, waste, water and waste water sectors, among others. Good environmental management is increasingly a central consideration in mission planning processes, and there are plans to introduce a system for monitoring and managing operational performance in this area across missions. In order to better respond to the spread, intensity and evolving nature of conflict, I established a High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, whose report, released in June 2015, forged a new vision for peace operations. My response, issued in September 2015, set an ambitious but critically important reform agenda which the Secretariat has begun implementing. A Leaders’ Summit on Peacekeeping, on 28 September 2015, which I co-chaired with nine Heads of State and Government, reinforced the peacekeeping partnership by laying the foundations for a new, progressive and cross-regional vision for peacekeeping operations. At the Summit, some 60 Member States pledged over 40,000 police and military personnel, broadening the base of contributors to peacekeeping and reaffirming its universal character. These initiatives sent an important political signal about the commitment to effective peace operations in a changing global landscape. Significant efforts were made to implement as many of the concrete ideas and commitments as possible during the reporting period. A central pillar of the reform agenda is strengthening the planning and conduct of peace operations. As part of this effort, over the past year the Secretariat has intensified efforts to improve the capabilities and performance of peacekeeping operations. This includes ensuring that uniformed personnel are trained and equipped to optimally respond to the operational challenges they face; strengthening a military performance evaluation framework which is accepted by all; and establishing command and control systems that are responsive and effective. 3.	Protecting civilians Tragically, this reporting period witnessed continuing brutality and grave violations of international humanitarian law as well as human rights abuses against civilians in many conflict settings. United Nations initiatives to protect civilians from such violations and abuses and ensure the enjoyment of their most basic rights took many forms. We provided support to Member States in developing and strengthening their capacity to prevent and respond to atrocity crimes, and ensure the rule of law, in full respect for international human rights law. The Security Council reiterated calls for compliance with international humanitarian and human rights law, as applicable, and for accountability for perpetrators of violations and abuses, including grave violations against children in armed conflict. There was significant progress in ending the recruitment and use of children by government armed forces, with advances in the criminalization of recruitment and in the establishment of age verification processes. The United Nations also engaged with several non-State armed groups listed in the annex to my annual report on children and armed conflict based in Colombia, Myanmar, the Philippines, the Sudan and South Sudan. Negotiations on action plans to end and prevent violations against children were especially effective where peace processes were ongoing or agreements were being implemented. On 15 May, the Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia — People’s Army (FARC-EP) announced the decision to separate minors under 15 years of age from FARC-EP camps as well their commitment to develop a road map to complete the separation of all minors. We made important strides in the past year with armed groups and parties to peace processes in addressing and ensuring accountability for conflict-related sexual violence. The joint announcement of 15 December 2015 by the Government of Colombia and FARC-EP on victims provides for the removal of amnesties for the most serious crimes, including conflict-related sexual violence. In Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea and South Sudan, we advocated for and achieved concrete advances in the form of convictions, indictments, a framework for implementation and a code of conduct, respectively. At the same time, we confronted emerging challenges and previously unforeseen threats. We observed a clear link between the rise of violent extremism and the most egregious forms of sexual violence being perpetrated by extremist groups. This is occurring in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, but also in Libya, Mali, Nigeria, Somalia and Yemen. It includes rape, sexual slavery, forced marriage, forced pregnancy and forced abortion, often as forms of religious and ethnic persecution. The Security Council expressed its deep concern regarding this disturbing trend, expanding the sanctions framework for the suppression of terrorist financing to formally include ISIL, and condemning the abduction of women and children for sexual exploitation, trafficking and trading and to force the payment of ransoms. Within this context, it is also important to bear in mind that other parties to conflict, including non-State armed groups and State forces, continue to be responsible for acts of conflict-related sexual violence and other violations of their obligations under international humanitarian law, and to disregard the most basic human rights of civilians, the sick and wounded, and hors de combat soldiers.In 2015, the Global Study and the high-level review of the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and security provided strong evidence that women’s empowerment and participation contribute decisively to the success of peace talks, to conflict prevention and economic recovery, as well as to the effectiveness of humanitarian assistance and the likelihood of sustainable peace. All three reviews recognized the centrality of the women and peace and security agenda for the United Nations work. Several recommendations are being implemented, including new initiatives aimed at building gender analysis capacity in peace operations, boosting women’s representation in peacekeeping, and tracking and scaling-up funding for initiatives related to women and peace and security. Many were reflected in Security Council resolution 2242 (2015), including the establishment of an informal expert group on women and peace and security, to allow the Council to take a more robust approach to the agenda in its own work, and ensuring women’s participation and leadership in developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism.Finally, with respect to the protection of civilians, I am horrified that some cases of abuse against civilians came from the very people sent to protect them: United Nations personnel and non-United Nations forces operating under a United Nations mandate. Sexual exploitation and abuse devastated the lives of victims and critically damaged global perceptions of the Organization. I took vigorous steps to combat this scourge, commissioning an independent review of our response in the case of the Central African Republic and, pursuant to its findings, appointing a Special Coordinator to strengthen our ability to prevent abuse and to respond to cases in a timely, transparent, measurable and visible way. In February 2016, I issued a report announcing additional measures to ensure greater oversight of operations and strengthen accountability in the areas of prevention, enforcement and remedial action to assist victims (A/70/729). Ensuring greater accountability is a collective endeavour and will require the full engagement of Member States. 4.	Mission transitionsDuring the reporting period, three peacekeeping missions — the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations Mission in Liberia and the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti — were undergoing a comprehensive reconfiguration process that will result in their drawdown and eventual withdrawal, and one special political mission, the United Nations Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi, concluded its mandate and drew down its operations in December 2015. Strategic assessments were planned (in Liberia and Haiti) or carried out (Côte d’Ivoire) during the reporting period, in order to effectively manage the transition, to help avoid any uncertainty, power vacuums, or relapse into conflict, and to prepare host governments and remaining United Nations actors for the post-mission phase. These reviews will contribute to a shared understanding of the critical residual peacebuilding needs that will guide engagement throughout and beyond the transition process. Building legitimate institutions, promoting good governance and establishing representative and inclusive State authority are key considerations for the durable consolidation of peace and stability, and pave the way for the progressive drawdown and exit of peace operations. For these efforts to be effective, however, securing the strategic consent and ownership of the host Government and national counterparts is critical. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission began working with national counterparts and international partners to develop a compact aimed at defining joint priorities and fostering a spirit of mutual accountability in efforts to sustain peace.5.	Sustaining peaceGround-breaking resolutions were adopted by the General Assembly (resolution 70/262) and the Security Council (resolution 2282 (2016)) on the review of the peacebuilding architecture. “Sustaining peace” as defined in the resolutions must now be at the core of United Nations actions, meaning that the prevention of violent conflict must be prioritized at every stage of a crisis and in all pillars of the United Nations work. In the resolutions the two organs also emphasize partnerships with regional and subregional organizations and international financial institutions and the importance of inclusivity, including of women and youth, and people-centred approaches for successful peacebuilding. I am invited to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-second session on the implementation of the resolutions, including with options for the adequate and sustainable financing, through assessed and voluntary contributions, of the peacebuilding activities of the United Nations system. I very much welcome this request and urge the Member States to take the necessary decisions to ensure solid resources behind our efforts to sustain peace.The Peacebuilding Commission is a key platform to sustain peace in conflict-affected countries, and continues its engagement in Burundi, the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia and Sierra Leone. During the reporting period, the Commission has embraced more flexible working methods, strengthened partnerships with regional and subregional organizations and continued to highlight peacebuilding needs in the post-Ebola recovery period from the national and regional perspectives. The Commission highlighted thematic policy and regional priorities, including cross-border and transnational challenges, financing for peacebuilding, youth and gender issues and transitions, and discussed peacebuilding needs and lessons learned in several countries, including Burkina Faso, Papua New Guinea and Somalia. The Peacebuilding Fund allocated $77.9 million to 14 countries in 2015, including significant allocations to priority peacebuilding activities in countries such as the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, the Niger and Somalia. Also in 2015, for the first time, the Fund successfully met my target by allocating 15.7 per cent to initiatives that focused principally on gender equality and women’s empowerment. I directed the Fund to support the United Nations renewed engagement in Sri Lanka to help the new Government to build trust and confidence among the people on its reconciliation and accountability/transitional justice agenda. Unfortunately, the Fund had its third weakest year since initial pledges in 2006, receiving $53.5 million in contributions from donors. As a result, it will not be able to reach its annual allocation target of $100 million in 2016 without additional donor contributions. This reality means that we are missing critical opportunities to ensure strategic coherence and enable politically risky but necessary endeavours. It also exposes the gap between norms and reality in preventing conflict and sustaining peace. Closing that gap is not just desirable, it is a matter of life and death for millions.6.	Democratic transitions and electionsProviding electoral support to Member States continued to be a priority during the reporting period. The United Nations provided electoral assistance to 67 countries. Many of these were cases where United Nations good offices were also being carried out. Emphasis was placed on the use of measures to strengthen confidence in electoral processes and help to bring about peaceful outcomes. United Nations support continued to include technical advice to Member States in designing inclusive electoral systems, reforming electoral frameworks that enjoy the broad support of national stakeholders, and putting in place electoral management bodies that are, and are perceived to be, impartial, honest and capable. Gender considerations were systematically included in all electoral assistance activities and policies.In Guinea, the United Nations helped to facilitate the resumption of the deadlocked political dialogue between the Government and the opposition on the electoral process, paving the way for the timely organization of the 2015 presidential election. Support to Nigeria’s fifth general elections, in 2015, involved high-level diplomatic engagement. My Special Representative for Central Africa also sought to defuse high tensions surrounding some of the elections in that region through the deployment of multi-agency teams to monitor the situation on the ground, report on developments, and support good offices interventions, for example in the Republic of the Congo. In Burkina Faso, the United Nations accompanied a delicate and often tense transition process that ended with the inauguration of President Kaboré in December 2015. My Special Representative for West Africa and the Sahel also exercised good offices to promote peaceful elections in the Niger in March-April 2016. At the request of the Government of France, experts were deployed to support the preparation of a new register of voters that may be used for a referendum on the future status of New Caledonia within the framework of the Nouméa agreement.The United Nations continued its technical support to the electoral process in a number of countries under a mandate from the Security Council. In Côte d’Ivoire, my Special Representative built confidence between the parties, thus allowing them to overcome the thorny issues that risked delaying the electoral process. The United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire provided much-needed logistics support. The United Nations Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi observed all major electoral events in Burundi in 2015 and found that “the overall environment was not conducive for an inclusive, free and credible electoral process”. These conclusions were consistent with those of the African Union and subregional organizations.Some of the contexts in which assistance was provided were very complex and fragile. In the Central African Republic, we assisted national stakeholders in ensuring that the 2015/16 presidential and legislative elections were credible and peaceful. Technical support was provided to electoral reform and preparations for the upcoming parliamentary and district council elections in Afghanistan. The Organization also continued its technical electoral support to Haiti in the complex and fraught political environment leading up to the 2015/16 presidential and legislative elections.Beyond elections, the United Nations assists democratic transitions by providing political facilitation and supporting national efforts to strengthen accountability and the rule of law and to advocate for space for civil society organizations, which regrettably face increasingly harsh restrictions in a growing number of countries. Parliaments remained key partners during the reporting period. Two landmark United Nations agreements — the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction — explicitly referenced their role in implementing and monitoring Governments’ international commitments. A large number of United Nations entities continued to provide support to many national parliaments around the world.B.	Maintenance of international peace and securityIn the past year we faced increasingly complex, interconnected threats to international peace and security. Some were new. Others were long-standing threats that had intensified or taken on more virulent forms. Extremist groups captured large swathes of territory in the Middle East and West Africa and significant sources of revenue while terrorizing and abusing millions of people. Conflicts became increasingly transnational. Tensions between Member States rose in some regions. The Security Council’s agenda was dominated by concerns about terrorism and violent extremism. The 37 United Nations peace operations deployed around the world had to adapt to increasingly non-permissive environments, while the outbreak of Ebola virus disease raised serious concern about the potential security risks posed by health emergencies. This evolving security environment resulted in severe risks for United Nations personnel and operations. Over the past year, there were several direct attacks involving the use of unconventional tactics, such as suicide bombings and the use of improvised explosive devices. In November 2014, a United Nations convoy was targeted by a suicide bomber driving an explosive-laden vehicle in Baghdad. In Somalia, on 20 April 2015, four UNICEF personnel were killed in a suicide bomb attack on a United Nations vehicle. From 1 September 2014 to 31 May 2015, 32 uniformed United Nations peacekeepers were killed in Mali, accounting for nearly half of the total of 73 fatalities of such personnel worldwide. One UNICEF staff member in Yemen was abducted and kept in captivity for 399 days before being released on 8 November 2014. The security situation has a disproportionate impact on the ability of our peace operations to implement their mandate, particularly in non-permissive environments.Amid these changes in security conditions, the High-level Independent Panel I appointed to carry out a review of peace operations has provided many important recommendations to ensure that United Nations operations remain fit for purpose. This review was undertaken alongside other important exercises that involved extensive consultations with Member States — the peacebuilding architecture review, which will be considered through an intergovernmental process, and the global study on the implementation of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the earlier Expert Panel on Technology and Innovation in Peacekeeping, the report of which was released in February 2015. Drawing on them, my forthcoming report on United Nations peace operations will set out what I believe to be a critical agenda for reform in peace operations for the coming years and how we can effectively implement the key recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel.While the United Nations grappled with these new realities, we strove to stay the course on longer-standing threats and conflicts, to continue our quiet preventive diplomacy across the globe and to remain vigilant to emerging threats. 1.	Conflict prevention and mediationIn keeping with this sobering picture, our efforts in conflict prevention and mediation faced significant challenges. Following the descent of the Central African Republic into sectarian violence and the subsequent establishment of a peacekeeping force, the Organization — including through the good offices of my Special Representative for Central Africa and my Special Representative for the Central African Republic — has focused on facilitating a political process that includes the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of former combatants, pursues peace and reconciliation, extends the reach of State authorities and culminates in free, fair and transparent elections. This process successfully culminated in the holding of local consultations and the Bangui Forum, where a pact for peace, national reconciliation and reconstruction and a preliminary agreement on disarmament, demobilization and reintegration were agreed upon. Over the past year, Libya has witnessed a significant political and security crisis alongside the most serious outbreak of armed conflict since the 2011 revolution. The political division and fighting have caused significant civilian casualties and displacement, as well as severe social and economic damage. The Organization has been at the forefront of international efforts to promote a negotiated political solution. My Special Representative facilitated a multi-track dialogue process, which enjoys wide support among the Libyan actors, the international community and key regional players. Although the situation remains delicate, the United Nations strongly believes that the formation of a Government of National Accord is the best way for Libya to solve the current crisis and confront the many critical issues facing the country, including terrorism. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic remains a stain on our collective conscience as it enters its fifth year. It has now resulted in over 220,000 deaths, and over 12 million people remain in need of humanitarian assistance, including more than 5 million children. The Organization continues to promote a political solution based on the 2012 Geneva communiqué. In the Middle East, a third war in six years between Israel and armed militants in Gaza ended on 26 August 2014, during which more than 2,200 Palestinians and 70 Israelis were killed. I worked closely with all relevant stakeholders to halt violence and, in the aftermath, established a Board of Inquiry to review incidents in which death or injuries occurred at, or damage was done to, United Nations premises in Gaza, or in which the presence of weaponry was reported at those premises. In the absence of progress on intra-Palestinian reconciliation and stronger ceasefire arrangements between Israelis and Palestinians, the situation in Gaza remains precarious. An effort at reconstruction, facilitated by a United Nations-brokered mechanism, did not receive sufficient funding. The peace process remains frozen, Israelis and Palestinians locked in a cycle of counterproductive actions and counteractions. The conflict in eastern Ukraine continues to devastate the country, posing a challenge to regional and even international peace and security. I continue to offer my full support towards a peaceful resolution. I also made my good offices available to support Myanmar to bring about lasting peace through an agreement on a nationwide ceasefire between the Government and major ethnic armed groups and political dialogue, after more than six decades of intermittent conflict. Meanwhile, in 2014, the United Nations provided support to Myanmar’s countrywide population and housing census, the first such exercise in 30 years. As Myanmar moves forward with its reform and democratization, the ongoing communal polarization, particularly in Rakhine State, places major responsibility on the country’s leaders. The United Nations has consistently pressed for the urgent and comprehensive resolution of the citizenship status of the Rohingyas. It has also been working continuously to combat incitement and hate speech, encourage preventive action and promote interfaith dialogue. As the country faces general elections late in 2015, we will continue to encourage a credible, inclusive and transparent electoral process.In Yemen, the conflict between the Government of President Hadi Mansour and the Houthis and their allies led to a significant deterioration of the situation, in spite of the best efforts by the United Nations to find a consensual power-sharing solution between them. Although a United Nations-brokered agreement had been signed in September, the Houthis continued to consolidate and expand their hold on power and territory. In January 2015, the President and the Prime Minister tendered their resignations. The President escaped to Aden in February 2015, rescinded his resignation, and subsequently fled to Saudi Arabia. At the President’s request, a coalition of 10 countries led by Saudi Arabia commenced air strikes on Houthi and Houthi-allied positions on 26 March. At the same time, fighting on the ground in Yemen escalated, triggering a humanitarian emergency. With a view to promoting a peaceful resolution of the conflict, my new Special Envoy for Yemen convened consultations between the Yemeni parties in Geneva from 15 to 19 June. No consensus on resolving the situation was reached, however. His efforts are continuing.While the reporting period may have been dominated by the challenges in the international spotlight, there were many other situations where we made important progress or continued to carry out essential preventive work, both visible and quiet, by facilitating dialogue and helping to de-escalate tensions. In Burkina Faso, at the onset of the crisis and “popular uprising” that led to the departure of then President Blaise Compaoré, the rapid action taken by my Special Representative for West Africa, together with representatives of the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States, to support national stakeholders to engage in an inclusive national dialogue process resulted in an agreement on a transitional government. The Organization will continue to support Burkinabé stakeholders throughout the transition period. In Lebanon, the International Support Group worked to help preserve the country’s stability and unity by mobilizing international assistance in a range of areas, including to the Lebanese Armed Forces and in support of Government efforts to deal with the exceptional refugee presence as a consequence of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. My Special Representative for Iraq continued his efforts to mediate between key Iraqi stakeholders, including by facilitating an important agreement on revenue-sharing and oil exports between the Government of Iraq and the Kurdistan Regional Government. He also facilitated discussions on the Government of Iraq’s request, at a time of financial strain, to defer its compensation payments to Kuwait. I continue to be personally committed to facilitating a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue, where fully-fledged negotiations, facilitated by my Special Adviser, resumed in May 2015. In Mauritania, the United Nations country team supported a national dialogue on social cohesion, slavery and land rights. I welcomed the convening of direct talks between the Government of Afghanistan and Taliban representatives, held in Pakistan in July 2015, as an encouraging development for a potential peace process.Preventive efforts are also at the heart of my Human Rights up Front initiative, which aligns the actions of the United Nations system to ensure that we meet our most fundamental collective responsibilities to prevent serious human rights violations. Over the past year, efforts were made to improve the United Nations early warning and early action capabilities at both Headquarters and in the field as part of this initiative. Additional support was provided to several United Nations field presences to strengthen the Organization’s preparedness to meet its mandated obligations. With each passing year, our partnerships with regional and subregional organizations grow and deepen. This past year was no exception, as demonstrated by the examples below, and indeed throughout this report. The European Union is an important partner of the United Nations on mediation, conflict prevention and rapid response, including in the Central African Republic, Mali and Somalia. In Ukraine, we supported the efforts of the Organization for Security Cooperation in Europe, including its monitoring mission. In the Sudan and South Sudan, through my Special Envoy, we supported efforts by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development to mediate between the warring factions in South Sudan, as well as those of the African Union High-level Implementation Panel to hold an inclusive and credible national dialogue to address the root causes of the multiple conflicts in the Sudan and reach a cessation of hostilities in Darfur and in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile States. Our regional office in Central Africa helped the Economic Community of Central African States to strengthen its mediation architecture and worked together with our West Africa office to support the efforts of the Lake Chad Basin Commission to address the regional impact of the crisis brought about by Boko Haram. In Madagascar, the United Nations worked closely with the Southern African Development Community and the African Union to support the full implementation of the road map and to foster national reconciliation and democracy. In the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy continued to coordinate United Nations efforts with other “co-witnesses” — the African Union, the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African Development Community — in support of the implementation, by the signatories, of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. Vulnerable populations continued to suffer from or face severe risks of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity. In order to strengthen early warning, the Office on Genocide Prevention and the Responsibility to Protect produced a new Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes that identifies key risk factors and provides a methodology for assessing situations of concern. The Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide also provided technical assistance and support for capacity-building to Member States and regional arrangements, including the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the national committees set up by its member States to prevent genocide and other atrocity crimes.Violations against children, especially by extremist groups, continued and increased, including an alarming new trend of mass abductions of children, such as the abduction of the Chibok girls. My Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict led the establishment of a key monitoring and reporting mechanism in Nigeria which will document these violations and increase the accountability of perpetrators. The efforts of my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict resulted in mobilizing political will to address conflict-related sexual violence, for example through structured frameworks including specific commitments, with the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Sudan, the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition, and regional entities like the African Union and the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region. Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire and Guinea all made major strides in addressing sexual violence crimes.The United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women) also supported the meaningful participation or consultation of women in peace processes in Colombia, Mali, Myanmar, South Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic and Ukraine. In Colombia, those efforts resulted in women counting for approximately one third of the delegates on each side of the peace table and at least half of the participants in all public consultations. Another welcome trend in our peacemaking and mediation efforts, no matter how different and challenging those processes may be, is our progress towards enhanced inclusivity. In all processes where the United Nations was in a leading or co-leading role over the past year, we ensured regular consultation with civil society, including women’s groups. 2.	Democratic transitions and electionsInclusivity was also a key goal in our efforts to support democracy around the world, where we advised many Governments on ways to increase political participation, for instance by removing barriers to the participation of women as voters, candidates and election officials. In cases where the United Nations actively supported government and State formation processes, as in Iraq and Somalia, we advocated particularly strongly the inclusion of women, youth and minority groups, as well as for the formation of an inclusive government which would represent the interests of all components in society. The United Nations assisted a wide variety of countries with constitutional reform in the reporting period. In Somalia, my Special Representative worked closely with the Federal Government, regional stakeholders and international partners to maintain momentum on the country’s Vision 2016 agenda. Countries seeking to consolidate gains in their democratic transitions often face continuing instability due to weak institutional frameworks. There were instances of efforts to change presidential term limits or to interpret constitutional provisions in a way that would be favourable to the office holder. While constitutions are live documents and political systems evolve, a removal of term limits can be seen as self-serving and lead to conflict if it is not based on an inclusive and broad national consensus. In Burundi, despite a ruling of the Constitutional Court, the candidacy of the incumbent President has been highly divisive, polarizing the people of Burundi. Violent confrontations between the police and opponents to the incumbent’s third term bid, as well as an attempted coup d’état on 13 May, have increased the prospects of large-scale human rights violations with far-reaching consequences for Burundi and the Great Lakes region. The United Nations worked closely with Burundian stakeholders, regional leaders and the international community to defuse tensions and facilitate a dialogue process to help to create the conditions for the holding of peaceful, credible and inclusive elections.Many Member States turned to the United Nations for technical assistance in conducting credible elections. During the reporting period, such assistance was provided to over 65 countries at their request, some on the basis of current and new Security Council mandates. In Tunisia, the Organization provided support to national authorities for the conduct of the 2014 presidential and legislative elections and a constitutional referendum, and extended support to civil society organizations for public outreach activities and support to women candidates. In the Central African Republic, the United Nations has been providing assistance in preparation for presidential and legislative elections in 2015, while also helping to create a secure environment for the elections and the protection of the long-suffering civilian population. My Special Representative for West Africa worked with the Economic Community of West African States and the African Union to support the holding of peaceful and credible elections in Benin, Nigeria and Togo in 2015, and the Organization has worked with the Southern African Development Community to support the holding of elections in Lesotho and Zambia in 2014.The United Nations has also continued to support national efforts to prevent election-related instability and violence. Where this is appropriate and requested, the Organization has sought to link technical assistance and preventive diplomacy efforts in order to strengthen public confidence in electoral processes and their outcomes. 3.	PeacekeepingThe reporting period was a challenging one for peacekeeping. The ultimate goal of peacekeeping — to support a political process and help a country to make the transition from conflict to lasting peace — remains the same. However, the context in which mandated tasks are implemented continues to evolve and the mismatch between the resources assigned to our missions and the complex security environments in which they operate has become increasingly glaring. Several peacekeeping operations had to adapt to these increasingly non-permissive security environments, with ongoing violence and no prospect of political resolution in sight. Examples include Mali and Darfur, where the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) face deadly attacks and asymmetric threats, including from improvised explosive devices, armed groups and criminal organizations. In other cases, missions were deployed to active conflict zones where there is no peace to keep and no peace agreement to support. In these instances, our operations have to first bring about a cessation of hostilities, while also providing protection to civilians, before they can focus on long-term, sustainable peace. This has been the case, for example, in the Central African Republic, where there was no political road map for a period of time and where the transnational nature of the conflict, difficulties in identifying the parties to the conflict, and blurry distinctions between combatants and civilians make the roles of peacekeepers and the good offices of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General more difficult than ever. The Organization is developing a regular and open exchange with the Security Council to ensure that peacekeeping mandates are realistic, feasible and accompanied by the appropriate level of political support and resources. Our peacekeeping partnership with the African Union was also refined and consolidated during the reporting period. Both Organizations have learned lessons from the transitions from African Union to United Nations missions which were effected in Mali in 2013 and in the Central African Republic in September 2014.We worked to consolidate security and governance gains in Côte d’Ivoire, Haiti and Liberia, with the eventual aim of drawing the missions to a close. While mission drawdown plans in Liberia suffered a setback as a result of the Ebola crisis, significant progress was made in 2015 towards enhancing the Government’s capacity to manage its own security and deliver public services. In Haiti, the mission continues to engage with the Government on preparations for national elections, but risks remain for the full adherence to the electoral calendar, which will require sustained political engagement from the international community. The Organization will work to establish a clear framework for a smooth transfer of tasks to partner organizations and host Governments.In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United Nations worked closely with the Government to ramp up the second phase of the International Security and Stabilization Support Strategy which, it is hoped, will consolidate political and security gains and extend State presence and authority to new areas of the east. At the same time, in March, the Organization launched a strategic dialogue with the Government on key issues including continued support of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) to the operations of the national Armed Forces in accordance with the human rights due diligence policy and a road map for the end state of MONUSCO in the country.In a sign of how the world is changing, we leveraged our experience in deploying support and humanitarian missions in highly innovative ways during the reporting period to help Member States to cope with unanticipated global challenges. In response to a request from the Presidents of Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone for the United Nations to lead coordination of the international response to the unprecedented Ebola outbreak, the United Nations Mission for Ebola Emergency Response was designed, authorized and deployed in a span of  10 days — a record pace for the Organization — to harness the capabilities and competencies of all relevant United Nations actors under a singular operational crisis management system to reinforce unity of purpose, effective ground-level leadership and operational direction to ensure a rapid, effective, efficient and coherent response to the Ebola crisis. It was the first-ever United Nations emergency health mission. This flexibility and vision was similarly exercised with the deployment of the United Nations partnership with the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, which led to the dismantling and destruction of 98.8 per cent of the officially declared chemical weapons stock of the Syrian Arab Republic.Throughout the reporting period, we continued to place the highest priority on rapidity, efficiency, effectiveness, credibility, accountability and conduct and discipline in all our peace operations. While the cost of peacekeeping today exceeds $8.5 billion, the per capita cost of peacekeeping today is 17 per cent less than it was in 2008-2009 when adjusted for inflation. With respect to conduct and discipline, I have proposed a strengthened programme of action against sexual exploitation and abuse for the consideration of the General Assembly in my report (A/69/779). In recent months, allegations have surfaced of sexual abuse and other serious crimes by non-United Nations international troops deployed to the Central African Republic under a Security Council mandate. Further incidents were later also alleged to have been committed by peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic. The Mission, the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and Field Support and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights are working closely together to follow up on all of those allegations, both through internal mechanisms with regard to misconduct of United Nations troops and also through engagement with concerned Member States and the African Union. I have also appointed an independent external review panel to examine the Organization’s handling of such allegations, assess the adequacy of the procedures in place and make recommendations on how the United Nations should respond to similar allegations in the future.4.	PeacebuildingThe Peacebuilding Commission, Fund and Support Office celebrate their tenth anniversary in 2015. As foreseen, the Security Council and the General Assembly jointly sought a review of their role and position, as well as that of the operational entities of the United Nations system, with respect to peacebuilding. On 29 June, the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, which the two bodies asked me to appoint, submitted its report (see A/69/968-S/2015/490) providing a set of interrelated recommendations on how to improve performance in “sustaining peace” and preventing lapse and relapse into conflict. I look forward to the outcomes of the second, intergovernmental phase of the review. In my recent report on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict (A/69/399-S/2014/694), I identified a number of lessons that are highly relevant for the review. The Peacebuilding Commission also held some pertinent deliberations during the reporting, for example on how conflict-affected countries can generate domestic resources and fight against illicit financial flows. I applaud this move by the Commission towards more practical means of performing its core function of resource mobilization beyond traditional fundraising and towards global policy development. Meanwhile, the Peacebuilding Fund achieved its target through the allocation of $99.3 million to 16 countries emerging from conflict or political crisis, continuing the upward trend from previous years. A total of 9.3 per cent of allocations went to projects promoting women’s empowerment and gender equality as their principal objective. This was up from 7.4 per cent in 2013, but still below my target of 15 per cent, which is particularly disappointing as we approach the anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) and the review of its implementation. We must intensify these and other efforts to undertake gender-responsive peacebuilding. Overall, the Fund was active in just over 20 countries. During the same period, total contributions to the Fund in the amount of  $78.2 million were made by 21 Member States. Two new countries were declared eligible for funding from the Fund — Madagascar and Mali. On the basis of a programming target of $100 million and forecasted contributions of approximately $60 million in 2015, the Peacebuilding Fund is seeking support from Member States to cover a funding gap and sustain Fund activities of at least $40 million.B.	Maintenance of international peace and securityThe past 12 months have witnessed several events on the international peace and security stage that are cause for deep concern. The conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic has led to well in excess of 150,000 deaths and left more than 680,000 people injured. A United Nations investigation team concluded that chemical weapons had been used in a suburb of Damascus. Events in Ukraine have raised fears of a dangerous escalation and a return to the polarized world of the past. The best efforts of the international community have failed to prevent loss of life and human rights violations in the Central African Republic and South Sudan. In contrast, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) has made progress in neutralizing and disarming armed groups. In the Middle East, the kidnapping and murder of three Israeli teenagers and a Palestinian teenager in the West Bank led to a severe Israeli crackdown on Hamas, on the one hand, and a barrage of rocket fire at Israel by Hamas, on the other. As at the time of preparation of the present report, more than 1,200 Palestinians, most of them civilians, had been killed in the Gaza Strip since 7 July, following the launch of a protracted Israeli military operation. During the same period, the conflict claimed the lives of 56 Israeli soldiers and two Israeli civilians. Both sides repeatedly failed to reach agreement on meaningful ceasefires and the international community’s efforts in this regard also continued to fall short. An especially reprehensible feature of the fighting has been the attacks in Gaza by Israeli forces on a number of schools run by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East that were harbouring Palestinian civilians displaced by the fighting.The global security environment in which the United Nations operates continues to exhibit worrying trends. Security threats have become more complex, with the use of unconventional tactics and often direct attacks against civilians and the United Nations, including improvised explosive devices, suicide bombings and abductions. The line is increasingly blurred between criminals and hostile groups and peace spoilers, including extremists with transnational strategies and sophisticated tactics. The breakdown of the State security apparatus in intra-State and inter-communal conflicts poses tremendous security challenges and tests the Organization’s capacity to carry out its mandates and critical programmes. There are risks of potential security and safety incidents from the use of nuclear, biological, chemical or radiological materials or from cyberattacks. The United Nations is often an alternative and relatively soft target, and the past year has witnessed complex attacks targeting United Nations personnel and premises in mission and non-mission settings alike, with tragic loss of life.1.	Conflict prevention and mediationWith the mounting complexity and growing costs of addressing crisis situations, the imperative of prevention is higher than ever. Over the past year, we have faced enormous challenges in conflict prevention and mediation, across several continents. I should like to highlight a number of specific cases where our efforts have made an impact. In Guinea, through persistent preventive diplomacy, my Special Representative for West Africa was instrumental in helping the Government and the opposition to agree on the modalities for the legislative elections, held, after much delay, on 28 September 2013 and marking a milestone in the country’s transition. In the Great Lakes region, my Special Envoy engaged regional leaders, international stakeholders and civil society groups to advance the implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, in addition to related political initiatives, although the underlying causes of conflict in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo still need to be addressed. I undertook two joint visits with the President of the World Bank, together with the Chairperson of the African Union Commission and the representatives of donor countries, to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Sahel in May and November 2013, respectively. The visits were aimed at fostering a multidimensional approach to development that would address the nexus between peace, security, human rights and development, an approach that is vital for ensuring durable solutions.In Somalia, the establishment of a new political mission in Mogadishu for the first time since 1995 was an important milestone. Complex challenges remain. My Special Representative continues to support the Government and other actors in the country through his good offices. His role in support of a peaceful indirect election in Puntland in January 2014 has been widely acknowledged. My Special Adviser on Yemen, working closely with the Gulf Cooperation Council and the Security Council, facilitated the successful conclusion of the National Dialogue Conference in January 2014. To mobilize support for the stability of Lebanon against the impact of the Syrian conflict, I established an international support group in September 2013. We also continued to support the efforts of the Lebanese authorities to preserve security and unity, including through the formation of a government of national interest.In Myanmar, the progress made in strengthening democratic and human rights institutions, inclusive socioeconomic development and peace efforts between the Government and various armed ethnic groups is at risk of being undermined by growing communal tensions and religious strife. Our good offices effort will need to be sustained in order to continue to tackle those issues, in addition to constitutional reform, national reconciliation and other challenges emerging at this critical juncture.In our conflict prevention and mediation work, we continue to face challenges regarding how best to engage with sometimes amorphous movements or fractured armed groups and how to ensure inclusivity. There is increasing interest in national dialogues as a tool, Yemen being an example. Consultation with women’s groups is also one of my priorities and has been conducted in six of our processes over the past year (Georgia, Mali, Sudan (Darfur), Syrian Arab Republic, Yemen and Western Sahara). High-level gender expertise has been systematically provided to most peace and security processes.We have been able to better respond to increasing demands from Member States to support national actors in their conflict prevention and mediation efforts. In South America, where peace talks between the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia were launched in August 2012, the United Nations has supported the contribution of civil society through dialogue mechanisms.Experience over the past year has also highlighted the important role of regional and subregional organizations, with which we have strengthened our relationships. Our regional offices in West Africa, Central Africa and Central Asia have played a significant role in fostering conflict prevention and mediation partnerships, in addition to rapid responses to regional crises. There are also, however, several tragic cases where we have not been successful. While our joint efforts with the League of Arab States to put an end to the violence in the Syrian Arab Republic succeeded in bringing the sides together in two rounds of talks in Geneva, unfortunately the talks have yielded little. More than 150,000 people, including over 10,000 children, have been killed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. A further 6.5 million are internally displaced and 2.8 million are seeking refuge in other countries, notably Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey. In the unfolding tragedy of the Central African Republic, the United Nations has been assisting the Economic Community of Central African States, its mediator and the African Union in endeavouring to resolve the crisis. Thousands of people have been killed since March 2013 when the Séléka rebel coalition ousted the President, François Bozizé. At the time of preparation of the present report, more than 625,000 people had been displaced throughout the country. While our immediate priority is to stop the violence, we are working to facilitate a political process, with particular attention to the need for reconciliation. During the period under review, conflict-related sexual violence remained underreported but prevalent in settings such as the Central African Republic, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Libya, Somalia, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic. The continued political will to prevent this scourge was exemplified by the Declaration of Commitment to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, launched on the sidelines of the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly, and the subsequent Global Summit to End Sexual Violence in Conflict, held in London in June 2014. To translate political will into specific action, my Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict has continued to engage with national authorities at the highest level.The adoption of Security Council resolution 2122 (2013), general recommendation No. 30 of the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women and the declaration of the Peacebuilding Commission on women’s economic empowerment for peacebuilding represent significant steps in advancing the women and peace and security agenda more broadly.The Security Council has called for sustained monitoring and reporting on the violations affecting children in armed conflict and for perpetrators to be brought to account. In March 2014, my Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations Children’s Fund launched the global campaign “Children, Not Soldiers”, which is aimed at ending and preventing the recruitment and use of children by all national security forces in conflict by 2016. 2.	Democratic transitions and electionsCountries undergoing or seeking to consolidate democratic transition continue to benefit from inclusive, participatory, transparent and nationally owned constitutional reform. The implementation of a new constitution can take years and sometimes decades of commitment for the goals of democracy, good governance and the rule of law to be realized and enjoyed. The past 12 months have seen an increase in constitutional reform processes and requests from Member States for the United Nations to provide constitutional support, with peace operations and/or country teams providing assistance to more than a dozen Member States during the period under review. The United Nations country team continued to support reform efforts in Tunisia, where, setbacks notwithstanding, commitments to inclusive dialogue and consensus-building resulted in a more legitimate and nationally owned constitution and the foundation for stability and democratic governance, which is expected to culminate in elections in 2015. Member States have continued to see the value of United Nations support to electoral processes, with requests for assistance — which include technical assistance, the engagement of good offices and support to regional organizations — remaining high. For example, while technical assistance was provided to Afghanistan in the context of the presidential election held in 2014, my Special Representative also supported broad consultations on the legal framework and on the appointment of electoral commissioners. In Nepal, the Organization continued to provide technical support to the electoral commission and supported efforts to ensure that the political commitments of all relevant actors regarding the Constituent Assembly election held in November 2013 were met. A similar approach was taken in Guinea-Bissau. In Madagascar, the United Nations provided assistance to the electoral commission and worked with the Southern African Development Community and the African Union to enable peaceful elections in 2013 and the end of the transition process in 2014.Electoral assistance has been provided in challenging security environments, many under Security Council mandates. In Mali, the Organization supported the conduct of the 2013 presidential and legislative elections that ended the transition process. The United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq supported the electoral commission with the legislative elections in 2014, in spite of the difficult operating environment. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya supported the elections for the Constitutional Drafting Assembly and Council of Representatives, held in February and June 2014, respectively, as part of the post-conflict transition process. Further to a Security Council mandate and a request from the Transitional Government, the United Nations is providing support in the Central African Republic for the preparation and conduct of a referendum on the Constitution, in addition to presidential and legislative elections. Civil society organizations around the world have continued to demand to participate in transitions, governance and elections. That was reflected in the work of the United Nations Democracy Fund, which received more than 2,000 project proposals from organizations in over 130 countries during its annual proposal window. They included wide-ranging proposals from countries in transition, including Libya and Tunisia, where civil society had previously been almost nonexistent or under severe government control. At the same time, a growing number of Governments have proposed national legislation restricting the freedom of civil society groups to operate, including with regard to international funding. 3.	PeacekeepingMember States have demonstrated their continued interest in using peacekeeping and continued to recognize it as an effective and cost-effective tool, without which the human and material costs of conflict and relapse into conflict would be unquestionably higher. Although the environments for United Nations peacekeeping operations have always been challenging, we face today a heightened level and new types of security threat, requiring new approaches and strategies. Peacekeeping operations are being increasingly deployed earlier in the conflict continuum, before any peace or ceasefire agreement. Creating the political and security space necessary for successful negotiations is crucial. The lessons of early deployment contexts need to be better analysed and recognized. Achievements in the period under review included the establishment and deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, promoting reconciliation and political dialogue, including with armed groups, and the stabilization of the security situation, in particular in the north of the country, which remains volatile. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO addressed the crisis in the east, including by supporting the Peace and Security Framework and the deployment of the Force Intervention Brigade. In addition, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti facilitated constructive political dialogue, including on long-awaited legislative and local elections. We also supported the planning and deployment of the African-led International Support Mission in the Central African Republic and its transformation into a United Nations peacekeeping operation as the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.South Sudan has been gripped by violence and ethnic strife since midDecember 2013. While the United Nations Mission in South Sudan is protecting tens of thousands of civilians in its bases throughout the country, a political agreement between the parties is needed to halt the descent into a worsening spiral of violence and is vital to alleviating the plight of civilians. In the Golan, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force has continued to operate under extremely challenging conditions amid the continuing armed conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic. Together with the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, it has contributed to containing the crisis. The United Nations Mission in Liberia has contributed to improving security throughout the country, but there are concerns about the future as it draws down. There are similar concerns in Côte d’Ivoire in view of the elections scheduled for October 2015 and the gradual drawdown of the United Nations mission. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur has made important strides towards promoting peace and stability, but shortfalls in troop- and police-contingent capabilities and the need for improved coordination and integration structures within the mission remain challenges to the effective implementation of the mandate.Financial and capability constraints have a significant impact on our ability to deliver. The cost of peacekeeping, per capita, has been reduced by 15 per cent compared with four years ago. The United Nations continues to seek greater efficiency while increasing the effectiveness of its field missions. Human and material resources are limited, yet host populations and the international community expect us to protect civilians and implement varied and complex peacekeeping and early peacebuilding mandates. Fully meeting those expectations is a challenge.The field support requirements for our field missions continue to grow, with demand for more flexible, mobile and nimble operations able to deploy swiftly into increasingly inhospitable settings. In South Sudan, enhanced mobility and standby arrangements would have greatly assisted in the rapid strengthening of the mission when the crisis erupted. In Darfur, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation continues to operate across vast spaces and difficult terrain to protect civilians and facilitate humanitarian assistance, in spite of the increased number of attacks against peacekeepers. Ensuring that United Nations troops are properly supported and equipped is a high priority. We are striving to achieve the greatest possible impact on the ground with the resources that we are given, advancing our field support efforts through the global field support strategy. Supporting missions in the field will require an exploration of technological and other advances to improve effectiveness, increase efficiency and minimize the environmental footprint of field operations. Incorporating solutions offered by new technologies and other innovations remains a priority. The complexity of contemporary peacekeeping environments requires strengthened partnerships with all stakeholders, including regional and subregional organizations, the wider United Nations family, international and regional financial institutions and donors, and multilateral and bilateral partners. Only through such collaboration can we collectively address the challenges that we face.To be truly effective, United Nations peacekeeping requires the highest political engagement and support from the international community and host Governments. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, a coordinated political strategy in the form of the Peace and Security Framework has been vital in underpinning the efforts of MONUSCO to neutralize and disarm armed groups. The consent of the host Government, the support of host communities, the active involvement of all key parties, the inclusion of women in peace processes, the strong political engagement of key Member States and the provision of the resources and authority required for the Secretariat to deliver the mandates provided have all been critical, as have the political will and support of the Security Council and police- and troop-contributing countries.4.	PeacebuildingThe past year saw an important milestone in the emergence of Sierra Leone from conflict, with the closure of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in that country in March 2014 and the transfer of responsibility for the Organization’s continued support to the United Nations country team. Peacebuilding remains an unpredictable enterprise, however, with the constant risk of relapse, as demonstrated by the re-eruption of violent conflict in the Central African Republic and South Sudan, in addition to political tensions in Guinea and a challenging road towards the restoration of constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau. The Peacebuilding Commission brought to bear the collective weight of Member States in support of peacebuilding processes in six countries. In Sierra Leone, the Commission accompanied the country through the transition. With the assistance of the Peacebuilding Support Office, Member States also continued to provide political support to United Nations officials and mandates in Burundi and Liberia. My Special Representatives also benefited from the support, in difficult circumstances, of the Peacebuilding Commission in the Central African Republic, Guinea and Guinea-Bissau, which helped to reinforce their political messages and efforts to mobilize international and regional support.The Peacebuilding Fund also played a critical role, allocating $86.7 million, a significant increase over the amount in 2012, to support peaceful transitions in 14 post-conflict countries in 2013. The Fund supported United Nations responses to the relapse into violence in the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau. In Guinea and Yemen, it supported critical mediation efforts and national dialogues. Elsewhere, in Burundi, Kyrgyzstan, Liberia and Sierra Leone, the Fund provided assistance in the areas of decentralization, justice, human rights and the participation of women in politics.B.	Maintenance of international peace and securityThe past year clearly demonstrated the complexity of contemporary conflict and the challenges involved in mounting coherent, effective international responses. Multiple sources of instability interact in countries such as Afghanistan, the Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Mali and the countries of the Sahel, Somalia, the Syrian Arab Republic and Yemen. They include sectarianism; criminality; extremism; exclusion; corruption; pressures related to resources, demographics and the environment; weak State capacity and legitimacy; rampant human rights violations; unstable neighbours; the use of explosive weapons against civilians; and porous borders permitting illicit flows of weapons, narcotics and people. These factors, combined with technological innovation, have strengthened the hand of armed groups and criminal and extremist elements, providing them with enhanced means to do significant harm, including through asymmetric tactics. Such groups tend to be well equipped and well resourced, with unprecedented transnational reach, and are sometimes ideologically driven. Some of these environments pose substantially more complex challenges than has been the case in the past. Civilians have paid an unacceptably heavy price in the past year, particularly in cases where the international community is divided and lacks the collective political will to act, such as that of the Syrian Arab Republic. The normative framework to protect civilians, including the concept of “responsibility to protect” and discussions about “responsibility while protecting”, has continued to be the subject of debate, not always matched by action. I have engaged the Organization in a reflection on strengthening our own capacity to respond to crisis situations and protect human rights through follow-up to the Internal Review Panel on United Nations action in Sri Lanka. We have agreed to reaffirm the vision of our collective responsibilities, reinvigorate our engagement with Member States, develop more effective headquarters response mechanisms, and strengthen our country presence, human rights capacity and information management. I call on Member States to be ready to do their vital part, to muster the will to act in a united manner to end egregious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. We cannot allow ourselves to become so accustomed to civilians bearing the brunt of violence that we lose our sense of outrage and our will to act. The range of actors seeking to play a part in the response to these challenges continues to expand and diversify. It has become common for the United Nations to operate alongside or in formal partnership with other international and regional players. These arrangements have worked well where the actors involved have common goals, clear comparative advantages and complementary political leverage, and coordinate effectively. But more remains to be done to ensure that international, regional and subregional actors work together and apply lessons about effective burden-sharing in complex environments. Throughout the past year, the United Nations acted through a variety of mechanisms, including 15 peacekeeping operations, 14 field-based special political missions, 10 special envoys and advisers, and many United Nations country teams around the world. The United Nations stepped up its efforts to improve the effectiveness of its activities in the area of peace and security, including through implementation of the civilian capacities initiative, the designation of a global focal point for police, justice and corrections in post-conflict and other crisis situations and the implementation of internal policies on peacekeeping transitions and on human rights due diligence in the provision of assistance to national security forces. 1.	Conflict prevention and mediationThe United Nations was at the forefront of a variety of prevention and mediation endeavours during the past year, thanks in part to improvements in our mediation support capacity, new and stronger partnerships with the League of Arab States, the African Union, the European Union, the Organization of American States and the Organization for Islamic Cooperation, as well as strong political backing from Member States. The Organization was well positioned to respond rapidly to rising tensions through its regional offices in West Africa, Central Africa and Central Asia and through its standby team of mediation experts. In recognition of the continuing and regrettable underrepresentation of women in peace processes, the Organization also stepped up its efforts to build the capacity of women’s groups to engage in these processes, where possible. In Africa, I appointed a Special Envoy — the first woman United Nations mediator — to support implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region. I visited the region with the President of the World Bank to draw attention to the related challenges of peace, stability and development. Recognizing the interconnected security, governance, humanitarian and development challenges facing countries in the Sahel, the United Nations developed an integrated strategy for the region. The Organization also worked closely with the African Union and other partners towards the goal of restoring constitutional order in the Central African Republic, Guinea-Bissau and Mali following the unconstitutional changes of government and consequent instability in those countries. Extensive mediation support was provided in Yemen to assist in implementing the negotiated, peaceful transfer of power and in launching the national dialogue. In Lebanon, the United Nations continued to support the efforts of the authorities to preserve security, stability and national unity. Facilitating progress in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process remained a top priority and I hope that the recent resumption of direct talks will lead to a peaceful settlement and a two-State solution. The Organization’s joint efforts with the League of Arab States to bring about an end to the violence in the Syrian Arab Republic and to launch a process leading to a political solution yielded little in the face of the continuing political impasse on the ground, in the region and in the Security Council, as well as tragic military escalation. Efforts to mitigate the regional consequences of the conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic, including the burden on neighbouring countries of the outpouring of refugees, were similarly insufficient given the magnitude of the crisis. In Europe, I continued to offer my good offices to the parties in Cyprus to find a comprehensive settlement and also actively supported the Geneva international discussions on Georgia and the South Caucasus, altogether with the European Union and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. We also stepped up efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution to the “name issue” between Greece and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. In Central Asia, working in close partnership with the World Bank, the Organization fostered increasingly close cooperation on water management. In South America, where peace talks between the Government of Colombia and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia were launched in August 2012, the United Nations supported the contribution of civil society through dialogue mechanisms. 2.	Democratic transitions and electionsThere were some alarming threats to hard-won gains in democratic governance in the past year, including restrictions on civil society and some reversals of constitutional order, most dramatically in Egypt. I urge all sides to concentrate on ending the violence and incitement, fostering genuinely inclusive reconciliation, and re-establishing the rule of law. There were also cases, such as Myanmar and Somalia, where tangible progress was made. The Organization offered support to political transitions in a wide array of cases.Since September 2012, the Organization supported the preparation and conduct of elections in 55 Member States, at their request or with a mandate from the Security Council. In Afghanistan, we assisted the Independent Election Commission in reform of the electoral legal framework, voter registration, and capacity-building. Special attention was paid to ensuring broad participation to prevent disenfranchisement as a result of security challenges, thereby building confidence in the electoral processes due in 2014 and 2015. In Iraq, the United Nations continued to provide technical advice and to build the capacity of the Independent High Electoral Commission. Significant progress was made regarding the participation of women and the inclusion of persons with disabilities.In Somalia, the Organization supported the finalization of the Provisional Constitution and the establishment of a new Federal Parliament, bringing an eight-year political transition to an end. In June 2013, a new United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia was established to provide political and strategic support to the Somali authorities as they work to consolidate peace and security and establish new federal structures, in advance of national elections scheduled for 2016. Sadly, some United Nations colleagues paid for these efforts with their lives and the people of Somalia continue to endure unacceptable levels of instability. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya supported the handover from the National Transitional Council to the elected General National Congress in August 2012. In addition, support was provided to the constitutional process, to elections for the drafting assembly and to the continued building and reform of the institutions of the new Libyan State. My Special Representative for West Africa contributed to dispelling the climate of mistrust between the Government and the opposition in Guinea and reopening talks on preparations for legislative elections. In Kenya, in the period leading to the general elections of March 2013, the United Nations maintained regular contacts with the key political leaders to promote respect for the rule of law. In Burundi, the United Nations facilitated the adoption of an inclusive road map for the preparation of the 2015 presidential elections. Through sustained engagement, the United Nations also promoted political dialogue and national reconciliation in Bangladesh, Maldives and Myanmar. 3.	Peacekeeping The complexity of contemporary conflict poses challenges that go to the heart of peacekeeping. In the past year, the Organization was mandated to deploy peacekeeping missions in volatile and non-permissive environments, where hostilities were ongoing and political settlements had not yet been achieved. In some cases, counter-terrorism operations were under way. In the Syrian Arab Republic, lack of progress towards a political resolution and the intensification of armed violence limited the ability of the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic to implement its mandate, which was not renewed beyond four months. The impact of the situation in that country was felt by other peacekeeping operations in the region. While exercising its important role in maintaining the 1974 ceasefire between Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force adjusted its operations and posture to continue implementing its mandate while minimizing the risk to personnel from ongoing clashes between members of the Syrian Arab Armed Forces and the armed opposition inside the area of separation. The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon increased its vigilance in southern Lebanon. In May 2013, the Security Council authorized the deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, mandated, inter alia, to support a national political dialogue and electoral process, as well as the extension of State authority, to stabilize key population centres and protect civilians. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the capture of Goma in November 2012 by the armed group known as the 23 March Movement (M23) triggered regional and international re-engagement, leading to the signature by 11 countries of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The Security Council authorized the establishment of an intervention brigade within the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, tasked, on an exceptional basis and without creating a precedent or any prejudice to the agreed principles of peacekeeping, to conduct targeted offensive operations with the aim of neutralizing and disarming armed groups. The tasks assigned to the Organization in Security Council resolutions 2098 (2013) and 2100 (2013) represent an evolution, not a revolution, in United Nations peacekeeping. Any use of force by United Nations peacekeepers must be in the context of a clear political process or political agreement and in keeping with international humanitarian law. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mali and elsewhere, the core principles of peacekeeping will continue to apply on the understanding that impartiality does not mean neutrality in the face of atrocities, and that maintaining consent does not mean that spoilers can prevent United Nations missions from implementing their mandate. Moreover, as United Nations peacekeeping deploys into new contexts, appropriate tools are needed to address new or intensified threats, including force enablers and multipliers, improved command and control and more effective information and analysis tools. Other peacekeeping operations faced volatile security situations in the past year. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan continued to support the protection of civilians amid escalating intercommunal violence in Jonglei State. Despite these challenges, transitional political milestones were reached, including the completion of the national census and constitutional review. With the support of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei, the operationalization of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism and the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone in March 2013 contributed to improved relations between the Sudan and South Sudan. In Darfur, Sudan, evolving conflict dynamics allowed the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) to focus on areas with the highest security threats, while lowering the troop and police ceiling. Nevertheless, the intensification of violence in some parts of Darfur, including the targeting of UNAMID troops, has highlighted the need to increase the mission’s capacity to deter and address threats to civilians.A number of peacekeeping operations began a process of rightsizing or drawdown. After 14 years of a Security Council-mandated presence in Timor-Leste, the last United Nations mission, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, completed its mandate in December 2012. The United Nations and Timor-Leste will now enter into a new phase in their relationship with a focus on development and continued institution-building. In Liberia, the successful conduct of the second post-conflict election allowed the Organization to begin reducing the military component of the United Nations Mission in Liberia while increasing its police presence to enhance the capacity of the national law enforcement institutions. Similarly, progress in consolidating peace in Côte d’Ivoire enabled the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire to withdraw one battalion in 2013. In Haiti, improved security has allowed the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti to reduce its uniformed component and refocus efforts on the consolidation of political stability and the rule of law. The capacity of special political and peacekeeping missions to address the specific needs of women and children was enhanced through deploying women advisers and child protection advisers and strengthening training. My Special Representatives increased advocacy at the national level to build capacity and strengthen prevention and response, including through monitoring and reporting. With United Nations support, the Governments of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia, South Sudan and Myanmar signed action plans to end conflict-related violations against children. Partnerships with regional and subregional organizations, such as the African Union, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Collective Security Treaty Organization, remained an important feature of United Nations peacekeeping efforts. This will continue as operations deploy to volatile environments. The United Nations continued to support the African Union’s capacity to plan, deploy and manage its peace support operations, including through the United Nations Office to the African Union. In Somalia, some 17,700 troops and police officers of the African Union Mission in Somalia were deployed and sustained with the Organization’s support to advance peace in the country. The United Nations also provided guidance and technical expertise to the African Union Commission on the operationalization of the African Standby Force and contributed to the development of key doctrinal and training material. The European Union’s approval of a plan of action to enhance its support to United Nations peacekeeping and the revitalization of the United Nations-European Union Steering Committee on Crisis Management were particularly noteworthy. The United Nations continued to strengthen support mechanisms for peacekeeping operations, including a strategic guidance framework for international police and generic capability standards for infantry battalions and staff officers. There were improvements to the governance and management framework of the global field support strategy and its key performance indicators to help ensure that support to the field is faster, of higher quality and more effective. Vacancy rates for international staff in peacekeeping and special political missions dropped to 12.6 per cent in March 2013, down from a high of 33.8 per cent in 2008. 4.	PeacebuildingRecognizing the multiple sources of instability, the high risk of relapse and the long-term nature of peacebuilding, my report to the Security Council on peacebuilding in the aftermath of conflict sets out new priority directions, emphasizing the importance of inclusivity, institution-building and sustained international support. The challenging task facing the Peacebuilding Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Peacebuilding Support Office was underlined in the past year by significant setbacks in several countries, notably the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau. In other cases, however, the Commission and the Fund were able to advance the consolidation of peace, lending political and financial support to the effective and peaceful participation by political parties in elections in Sierra Leone, financing the retirement of 3,928 military personnel in Guinea, contributing to the convening of the Burundi partners’ conference, and supporting the first justice and security hub in Liberia. The Peacebuilding Fund was also used to support critical political transition or peace consolidation efforts in Kyrgyzstan, Nepal, the Niger, Somalia and Yemen. It raised more than $80 million in 2012, its highest amount since 2008. B.	Maintenance of international peace and securityConflicts in recent years have grown more complex. The drivers of conflict have multiplied and the participation of non-State actors has increased. A brief overview of the United Nations engagement and achievements across the peace and security arena in the past year reflects the range and depth of the work under way. It also highlights the undisputable conclusion that our existing human, material and financial resources are overstretched. The Organization will not be able to meet the demands and expectations of its Members without the necessary resources and equitable global burden-sharing by its Members.Since September 2011, the Organization has engaged in more than 20 peace processes, supported democratic transitions in various Arab countries, assisted in preparing and conducting elections in more than 50 Member States, and worked to build peace after conflict through 16 peacekeeping operations, 18 political field missions and United Nations country teams. 1.	Conflict prevention, peace processes, democratic transitions and electionsAcross the board, the Organization has strengthened critical systems for rapid response to conflict prevention such as the standby team of mediation experts, the mediation roster and the ad hoc field deployments of Headquarters staff. Since July 2011, there have been 56 requests for the standby team of mediation experts and over 37 requests from the roster. The Organization can now deploy expertise, logistical support and resources to the field in record time, often within 72 hours. Three regional offices, in West Africa, Central Asia and Central Africa, are playing a critical role in rapidly responding to rising tension, outbreaks of violence and political crises. Supporting transitions in the Arab world has been a top priority over the past year. In Egypt and Tunisia, the Organization has provided technical assistance and expertise in organizing elections. Constituent assembly elections in Tunisia in October and parliamentary and presidential elections in Egypt from November 2011 to February 2012 and in May-June 2012, respectively, were vital steps in both countries’ transitions to democracy. In Libya, the mediation efforts of my Special Envoy created a platform for the United Nations and regional organizations to fully engage in seeking a peaceful solution to the crisis while addressing humanitarian issues. Thanks to forward planning, the Organization was able to respond quickly to the request of the Security Council to deploy a needs-based, flexible support mission in Libya. Electoral advisers were deployed to Tripoli in September 2011 to support national preparations for the first democratic elections in almost 50 years, which were held on 7 July 2012 in an overall smooth and transparent manner.To help to resolve the political crisis in Yemen and prevent a further deterioration of the situation, my Special Adviser exercised my good offices to promote dialogue and confidence-building on all sides. His efforts, undertaken in close collaboration with the Gulf Cooperation Council, the Security Council and others, resulted in the signing of an agreement on a political transition process on 23  November 2011. Within this framework, the United Nations supported the successful holding of elections on 21 February, leading to a peaceful transfer of power. Currently, the Organization is fully engaged in supporting the timely convening of an all-inclusive national dialogue conference.The crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic continues unabated, threatening to engulf the entire region. Efforts to broker a political solution have been hampered by the parties’ unwillingness to renounce violence — indeed their readiness to escalate it, with little or no concern for civilian victims, and by persistent divisions within the Security Council. On 2 August, I announced with great regret the resignation of Mr. Kofi Annan as Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab States to Syria. On 3 August, the General Assembly adopted a resolution on the Syrian Arab Republic, encouraging the Security Council to consider appropriate measures, calling on me and all relevant bodies to provide support for the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy to reach a political solution and requesting that I report to it within 15 days. The escalating violence prevented the United Nations Supervision Mission in the Syrian Arab Republic, the peacekeeping operation deployed to monitor a cessation of armed violence and support the implementation of the Joint Special Envoy’s six-point plan, from fully implementing its mandate, some Security Council members insisting on the Mission’s withdrawal. Nevertheless, the United Nations remains committed to pursuing, through diplomacy, an end to the violence and a Syrian-led solution that meets the legitimate democratic aspirations of its people. This can succeed only when the parties commit themselves to dialogue, and when the international community is strongly united in support.In Iraq, the United Nations continues to promote political dialogue and national reconciliation, focusing in particular on the resolution of disputed internal boundaries, including the status of Kirkuk. In Somalia in September 2011, key stakeholders signed the road map to end the transition, which was followed by the establishment of a permanent United Nations presence in Mogadishu. The United Nations is supporting the Government in achieving its transition priorities: drafting a constitution, reforming federal institutions, and establishing an inclusive and broad-based political authority in the country. Concurrently, through the United Nations Support Office for the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations delivered essential logistical services to African Union peacekeepers in AMISOM and provided technical and expert advice to the African Union Commission on managing AMISOM. In response to requests of Member States, following military coups d’état in Mali (March 2012) and Guinea-Bissau (April 2012), my Special Representatives in the region supported the mediation process undertaken by the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to facilitate the early restoration of constitutional rule. In Maldives, I deployed my good offices to encourage leaders of the Government and political parties to resolve the political crisis surrounding the transfer of power from the President to the Vice-President through dialogue and consensus. In Madagascar, our support to regional efforts helped to bring about the political road map of September 2011, which paves the way to elections. In Malawi, following political violence and social tensions in July 2011, I designated a facilitator for the Malawi dialogue process between the Government and civil society organizations which resulted, in March 2012, in an agreement between the parties on a road map for transition.In Nepal, the Organization has focused on encouraging a resolution to the issue of integrating Maoist combatants into the Nepal Army and the drafting of the constitution.The reforms in Myanmar led by the President, Thein Sein, and the role of Daw Aung San Suu Kyi in advancing the transition towards democracy, national reconciliation, and respect for human rights and the rule of law are encouraging. The process is still fragile, however, and many pieces will need to fall into place if the country is to successfully transition to democracy and achieve political reconciliation. The United Nations stands ready to support Myanmar, and I am ready to explore new and flexible ways to fulfil my good offices in a manner that will have the complete understanding and cooperation of the Government.2.	PeacekeepingDemand for United Nations peacekeeping was high during the past year. In the Golan Heights, in southern Lebanon, in Cyprus, in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, and in Western Sahara, United Nations peacekeepers oversaw the cessation of hostilities, while more durable, political solutions were being pursued. United Nations peacekeeping also provided support to national elections in 2011 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti and Liberia. In Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Haiti, Liberia and South Sudan, United Nations peacekeepers played a role in stabilization and the protection of civilians. They also provided capacity-building and early peacebuilding support to national authorities in political facilitation, human rights, police, justice, corrections, reform of security institutions, disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, mine action and civil affairs. In South Sudan, a new peacekeeping operation — the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) — was established and assisted national authorities in their efforts to prevent and contain intercommunal violence and related population displacement in Jonglei State. In the disputed area of Abyei, another new peacekeeping operation, the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA), facilitated peaceful coexistence between communities, deterred further armed violence and protected civilians, pending the resolution of the territorial dispute between the Sudan and South Sudan. The United Nations also supported efforts towards the launching of a Joint Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism along the common border of the Sudan and South Sudan. UNISFA, UNMISS and my Special Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan provided support to the African Union High-level Implementation Panel, which leads the negotiations on post-secession arrangements.Following reviews conducted at the request of the Security Council, the Secretariat will adjust the size and/or configuration of operations in Afghanistan, Côte d’Ivoire, Darfur, Haiti, Lebanon and Liberia from 2012 to 2014. These adjustments should allow for better response to the emerging challenges on the ground and the evolving needs of the national authorities. In Timor-Leste, the United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste, the Government and its international development partners are preparing to phase out the mission at the end of the year after the completion of the current electoral cycle.In order to address growing demands and capacity constraints, the United Nations is deepening and strengthening its strategic and operational collaboration on peacekeeping with organizations like the African Union, the European Union, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Collective Security Treaty Organization, ECOWAS, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development in eastern Africa and others. In 2011 the United Nations established a liaison office for peace and security in Brussels.To further support its efforts in the peace and security arena, the Organization will complete, by the end of 2012, the preparation of common standards for, among others, infantry battalions and staff officers, and the elaboration of the next strategy of the United Nations on mine action, as well as comprehensive training for formed police units. The Organization has launched a review of its force generation system, with a view to adapting it better to current needs. It has made progress on implementing the global field support strategy, which is already delivering on the promise of increased effectiveness and efficiency, as reflected in the rapid mounting of new operations in Libya, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab Republic. Innovative practices such as regional use of aircraft chartered by the Organization for its peace and security operations enabled the Organization to reduce its air charter-related expenses by some US$ 61 million by the end of June 2011. 3.	PeacebuildingThe continuing engagement of the Peacebuilding Commission and the programmes funded by the Peacebuilding Fund have made critical contributions to fostering stability in the countries that have requested support. In Guinea and Liberia, the Peacebuilding Commission has used the statement of mutual commitments to guide its engagement and respond to critical peacebuilding priorities. In the case of Liberia, the Commission has focused on accelerating progress towards meeting key benchmarks set by the United Nations Mission in Liberia, capitalizing on synergies with the Peacebuilding Fund and cooperating closely with the United Nations system on the ground. The Commission also expanded its partnerships with regional bodies through a high-level, peer-to-peer learning event held in Kigali in November 2011, which was organized together with the Government of Rwanda and the African Development Bank. During 2011, the Peacebuilding Fund allocated a total of $99.4 million. Sizeable allocations went to Burundi, for the reintegration of conflict-affected victims; Côte d’Ivoire, to re-establish State authority in conflict-affected regions; Guatemala, to reinforce judicial reforms; Guinea, to kick-start security sector reforms; Kyrgyzstan, to support national peacebuilding efforts following the inter-ethnic violence of June 2010; and Liberia, to help to consolidate security and justice. Efforts to promote gender mainstreaming and enhanced support for gender-responsive peacebuilding saw the launch in 2011 of a $5 million Gender Promotion Initiative, funded by the Peacebuilding Fund, in support of the United Nations seven-point action plan on women’s participation in peacebuilding.With the exception of Guinea-Bissau, which reverted to political turmoil following a military coup in April 2012, none of the 17 countries that have been formally declared eligible to access the Fund since 2007 has relapsed into generalized war or witnessed State collapse. Member States and donors recommitted their support to the Fund at its annual stakeholders meeting in November. 4.	Children and armed conflictAs the Organization and its Member States work together to address conflict, let us not forget one crucial dimension of this agenda: children and armed conflict. To date, 19 parties listed in my annual report on children and armed conflict as recruiting child soldiers have entered into action plans with the United Nations. This has contributed to the release of more than 40,000 children from the ranks of parties to conflict. Significant challenges remain, however. They include funding shortfalls for the long-term community-based reintegration needs of those children and the refusal of certain parties to enter into action plans with the United Nations. I urge all Member States to take action to protect children from grave violations in conflict-affected countries. 