
1 CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION 
 
 
     Nawacita or the nine national visions of Indonesia is the vision to realize Indonesianis sovereignty, independence and mutual cooperation as the national character. These visions were formulated when the RPJMN 2010-2014 was completed simultenously with the final stage of MDGs implementation in 2015. Nawacita was operationalized into the National Medium Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2015-2019. The major challenges of Indonesiais development are the large number of poor people, the gap between income groups and interregions, as well as environmental degradation. The RPJMN that consist of national development priorities has been converged with SDGs dimensions: human development, development of leading sectors, equity and territorial, in particular addressing regional inequality.  
     The human development dimensions include education, health, housing and mental/character. The leading sector dimensions consist of food sovereignty, energy and electricity sovereignty, maritime and marine as well as tourism and industry, while the equity and territorial dimensions consist of intergroup and inter-region equity covering the villages, frontier area, outside Java Island areas and the eastern regions. The implementation of three development dimensions is supported by legal certainty and enforcement, security and order, politics and democracy as well as governance and bureaucratic reform. 
     These development dimensions are in line with SDGsi dimensions and goals. Therefore, i) SDGs implementation has corresponding programsto achieve the targets, existing responsible ministries/institutions and contribution of non state actors and ii) financing for SDGs implementation is already in place within the State Budget. Hence, for Indonesia, implementing the national development means conducting the SDGs and contributing to the achievement of global SDGs. 
 
Figure 1.1 National Development Strategies 
Indonesia has developed metadata for 320 indicators and technical guideline for formulating action plans 
The challenges to achieve SDGs target are to ensure no-one left behind principle, to provide data disaggregation and to finance SDGs 
 
     In terms of SDGs indicators, Indonesia isadequately ready. Of the 241 global SDGs indicators, Indonesia already has indicators that are similiar to global indicators, proxy indicators and additional indicators that enrich the global indicators. Of the 320 Indonesian SDGs indicators, Indonesia has developed the metadata to ensure uniformity and comparability, along with their necessary disaggregation.  
     For SDGs implementation, Indonesia is preparing of national and subnational action plans for to 2017-2019. Indonesia is also preparing the Roadmap for achieving SDGs up to 2030. The technical guideline for formulating the national and sub-national action plans is completed to guide the 34 provinces and 514 districts/municipalities.  
     Indonesia applies the inclusive principle at every phase of planning and implementation process of SDGs.All stakeholders, namely the government, civil society organizations, philanthropy and business, as well as academics and experts are always involved in the processes. Their involvement is also applied in the preparation of this 2017 VNR report. This participation mechanism is reflected in the National Coordination Team which is enacted in the form of a Presidential Decree. Therefore, the SDGs implementation will be coordinated from national to sub-national level. 
     The challenge to achieve the SDGs targets is implementing the no one left behind principle because Indonesia is the largest archipelagic country with cultural, ethnic and religion diversities. In this regard, innovative ways are needed to ensure that SDGs implementation benefits all people. Another challenge is to measure Indonesia SDGs targets that comply with global indicators, in particular in the economic and environmental dimensions as well as to provide data disaggregation to optimally ensure that the no one left behind principle can be achieved. The availability of data is very crucial for the planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of SDGsachievements and future sustainable development. 
     Financing is also another issue to achieve the SDGs targets. Even though the Government of Indonesia has allocated funding for the implementation of SDGs, it is unsufficient to fulfill the needs. Other funding sources need to be explored through non-government financing such as private fund mobilization and foreign cooperation. 
 
     
2 CHAPTER 2 - METHODOLOGY AND PROCESS FOR PREPARATION OF THE REVIEW 
 
 

     The preparation of the Indonesian VNR is implemented by applying the principles of participation and inclusiveness. The compilation of this VNR 
The preparation of the Indonesian VNR is implemented by applying the principles of participation and inclusiveness 
involves four platforms consisting of government elements, either national as well as sub-national and legislative institutions, civil organizations, philanthropy and business, academics and experts. Government representatives involved various related ministries/institutions, among others: Ministry of National Development Planning/ Bappenas, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Health, Ministry of Agriculture, National Population and Family Planning Agency, Ministry of Womenis Empowerment and Child Protection, Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Technology, Research and Higher Education, Ministry of Public Works and Housing, Ministry of Maritime Affairs and Fisheries, Central Bureau of Statistics-Statistics Indonesia,  Ministry of Social Affairs, and National Commission of Women. Non-government representatives consist of 
Filantropi dan Bisnis Indonesia  for SDGs, Indonesia Global Compact Network, Indonesian Chamber of Commerce, Indonesia Bussiness Council for 
Sustainable Development, Association of Philanthropy  Indonesia, SMERU, 
Perkumpulan Prakarsa, Aisyiah, Indonesian Nutrition Institute, Women's Health Foundation, Indonesian Nutritionist Association, Indonesian Association of Public Health Experts, Mother and Child Health Movement Indonesian Midwives Association, Save The Children, Woman's Ship, Women Research Institute, Rare Indonesia, Conservation International, International NGO Forum on Indonesian Development, Transparency International Indonesia, Bogor Agriculture Institute, University of Indonesia, University of Padjajaran, and 
University of Parahiyangan. The involvement of the UN System consists of 
FAO, UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO, UNIDO, UNOCHA and UNDP.  This 
transparent and participatory mechanism was conducted so that all stakeholders are involved in the drafting process. 
     The 	following 	six 	principles 	were 	used 	to 	ensure 	inclusive implementation: 
1. Sharing schedules to stakeholders;  
2. Conducting public campaigns to encourage active participation in the entire preparation process; 
3. Utilizing various channels, online and offline, to give opportunity for public to provide input;  
4. Involving all stakeholders, both government and non-state actors such as academics and experts, philanthropy and business actors, civil society organizations and the media to ensure representation of all groups or public elements.  
5. Documenting and publicing to ensure accountability and transparency of the procces;  
6. Using easy-to-understand language to reduce the information gap of the involved parties. 
     
Indonesia formulates the interconnectedness between the seven reported goals and the theme 
Discussions on indicators in each goal are based on metadata, data and information availability 
VNR was prepared by a technical team that representing four platforms 
     The theme of HLPF SDGs in 2017 is \0xECEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world. Indonesia formulates the interconnectedness between the seven reported goals and the theme. The interconnected discussion on the theme which is the goal 1 of SDGs is focusing on two main aspects: (1) Increasing human development and (2) Increasing economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods. Improving the quality of human resources focus on achievements in the health sector (goal 3), sustainable food security and agriculture (goal 2), and education (goal 4). The education issue is not the main focus of 2017VNR as agreed at the global level, however the issue is important for poverty alleviation. The improvement of economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods is achieved by focusing on industry, innovation and infrastructure sectors (goal 9) as well as the sustainable protection and utilization of marine ecosystems as alternative natural resources that has not been adequatly utilized (goal 14). These two main aspects will be achieved if the enabling factors factors are and implemented, including gender (goal 5), partnerships in various sectors, data, and financing (goal 17).  
     Discussions on indicators in each goal are based on metadata, data and information availability. Trend is analysed for the last 10 years (2006-2016). Analysis of disaggregated data by socio-economic status, gender, age group, domicile, as well as administrative level was measured to address no one left behind principle. The data sources are from BPS-Statistics Indonesia, technical ministries, research institutions, NGOs and universities.  
     A Technical Team was established for each reported goal consisting of representatives for each platform.The team prepared and formulated the draft report. The VNR preparation started with a meeting to obtain common understanding and followed by several FGDs for each goal. The stages to prepare the report involving the outline, scheduling, analyzing focus of each chapter, consultating the draft, formulating the main message, and completing the full report. Each stage was communicated with all stakeholders by email andpublished via website(www.sdgsindonesia.or.id) to obtain feedback. 
 
Indonesia was involved in formulating the post-2015 agenda and has been involving all stakeholders in 
SDGs implementation 
Indonesia applies partnership principle among stakeholders which are based on mutual trust, participation, transparency and accountability 
The roles of four platforms of SDGs Indonesia 
3 CHAPTER 3 n POLICY AND ENABLING ENVIRONMET 
 
 
3.1 	CREATING OWNERSHIP OF THE SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS 
     One of the strengths of Indonesia in implementing SDGs is the involvement of all stakeholders, both the government and non-state actors, from planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluation as well as reporting. The partnership of all stakeholders was established long before the SDGs became a global commitment. It began since post-2015 agenda and the appointment of Indonesia by the UN SecretaryGeneral as a co-chairin theHigh Level Panel of Eminent Persons for the Post 2015 Development Agenda (2012 n 2013). Indonesia was also a member in the Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals (2013-2014) and played an active role in each negotiation stage to prepare the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda.In addition, Indonesia also appointed a Special Envoy of the President for High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons for the Post-2015 Development Agenda (HLP). In the HLP, Indonesiasuccessfully presented the issue of a global partnershipfor the implementation of sustainable development. As one of the countries promoting the issue of global partnership, Indonesia is also active in applying a multistakeholder partnerships approach in the preparation and implementation of SDGs. The Ministry for National Development Planning/Bappenas has been assigned by the President of the Republic Indonesia to coordinate all processes of planning, implementing, monitoring, evaluation and reporting of the SDGs by involving all the stakeholders.  
      Indonesia applies partnership principle among stakeholders which are based on mutual trust, participation, transparency and accountability. Stakeholders involved in Indonesiais SDGs implementation consist of four participatory platforms, namely the government and parliament, civil society organizations and media, philantrophy and business, and academics. Each platform has representatives in the Implementation Team andWorking Groups of the SDGs National Coordination Team, which provides opportunity to participate actively. These stakeholders are involved not only in the implementation stage, but also in determining the direction for SDGs implementation. For example, discussion on the Presidential Decree of Sustainable Development Goals, on development of metadata and on development of guidelines for formulating the Action Plans. This process was conducted in the form of offline and online public consultations.  
     The involvement and active participation of four platforms in a joint effort to implement SDGs is reflected in the structure of the National Coordination Team led by President. Each platform has different roles and approaches. The roles of the government are to formulate policies and programs, determine the indicators, prepare data and information, disseminate information, communicate and advocate, allocate budget, as well as monitor, evaluate and report. The roles of civil society organizations and media are to disseminate and advocate, facilitate and implement program, build public understanding, publish and monitor. The roles of philantrophy and business are to advocate business actors, 
     
facilitate programs, build capacity and provide resources. Finally, the roles of academics and experts are to build capacity, monitor and evaluate, and prepare policy paper for policy formulation. (Figure 3.1) 
 
 
Figure 3.1 Roles of Indonesia SDGs platforms 
 
     The commitment of each platform has been clearly shown through SDGs dissemination at both national and sub-national levels. Sosialisation and consultation about SDGs with stakeholders at the sub-national level has been done in 31 of Indonesiais 34 provinces and around 50 districts/municipalities. Commitment of the local governments at provincial or district/municipality levels to implement the SDGs is shown by allocating budget in Regional Budget (APBD) since 2016. Furthermore, some provinces have implemented activities to achieve the SDGs.  
     Several universities have established Center of Excellence on SDGs, among others, University of Padjajaran, University of Indonesia, Bogor Agricultural Institute, and University of Brawijaya. Universities will organize themselves in accordance with their competence and focus on certain goals.  
     Philantrophy and Business actors have conducted internal consolidation and coordination by establishing a platform called Philantrophy and Business Indonesia for SDGs (FBI4SDGs). The FBI4SDGs currently consists of 11 associations with more than 700 companies as members. They organize themselves into six working groups. This platform holds routine meeting every month. These meetings are meant to coordinate, share information with each other, and socialise the SDGs among the business actors. Furthermore, this platform on its own initiative has conducted a workshop to better comprehend the guideline for formulating action plan. This activity was aimed to build capacity of FBI4SDGsi members. This platform also conducted a National Festival on SDGs in 2016. 
Box 1. SDGs Implemention at Sub-National Level 
     The district/municipalities governments are the frontliner for public servicesprovision and for formulating development policies and programs. In addition to having the authority andfundingas well as being closer to the citizens, local governmentshave flexibility to make some innovations. Therefore, local governmentshave important roles to implement and achieve SDGs targets.  
     All SDG goals and targets, both directly and indirectly, areclosely related to local governmentsi development program. Ensuring their effective implementation of SDGs can present a challenge, since Indonesia has 514districts/municipalities with differing politicaland socio economic circumstances.  
     Some factors to make effective SDGs implementation at the local level possible are: strong political commitment, capacity of the local government to operationalize SDGs into action, and the presence of committed CSOs, business actors and universities. These factors are important to localize SDGs.The implementation of SDGs at the local level can start with the regions that already possess these factors. Therefore, they could be champions on SDGs to inspire other regions to actively participate in SDGs implementation. 
     Since the declaration of SDGs in September 2015, there are several districts and municipalities in Indonesia that have already shown their commitment to implement SDGs, among others, Pangkajene Islands District (Pangkep) in South Sulawesi Province, Bojonegoro Districtin East Java Province, Kubu Raya District in West Kalimantan Province, Gunung Kidul District in Yogyakarta Province, and East Lampung District in Lampung Province. Their commitment is realized in various initiatives. For example, Bojonegoro District has establised a SDGs Secretariat of Bojonegoro and the Pangkep District is preparing to formulate the SDGs Regional Action Plan which focuses on poverty, the gaps or inequality of education, health, and marine ecosystems. Similar to Pangkep District, Kubu Raya District will focus on poverty, education and health.  
     Their commitment must be maintained and strengthened. The challenges to localize SDGs are, firstly, defining strategy to operationalize SDGs at local level, since most of SDGs targets are at the outcome level but each country could have their own initiative on how to achieve the outcomes. Therefore, SDGs implementation needs policy, programs as well as guidelines for local governments and other stakeholders. Secondly, prioritizing the goals of SDGs. It is not easy for local governments to achieve all 17 Goals of SDGs. Determining priorities that are relevant with local context is one of the strategies to achieve the goals.  
 
 

     One of the platforms that is already actively playing its role on its own initiative is Civil Society Organizations (CSO) and Media. Several national 
The formulation of 2017 VNR has involved four platforms in a participatory and inclusive manner 
radios have aired and broadcasted SDGsi issues regularly. Faith based organizations and advocacy CSOs have actively facilitated implementation in their respective areas and provided advocacy to national and local governments. 
Several CSOs in social and advocacy sectors have coordinated and made coalition in a forum to advocate governments to give more attention in the implementation of no-one left behind principle. 
     The formulation of 2017 VNR has involved four platforms in a participatory and inclusive manner, which is indicated by active membership of representatives from each platform in a Technical Team and discussions for each 
     
SDGs has been integrated into the RPJMN 2015-2019 and is aligned with Nawacita 
 
The Presidential Decree is the legal basis for implementing SDGs. The 
National Coordination Team is led by the President and coordinated by Minister for PPN /Head of Bappenas by involving all the stakeholders 
goal. Each Technical Team has 10 to 12 members consisting of representatives from the government, CSOs, philantrophy and business, as well as academics.  
     The preparation of VNR is supported by experts from the academic circleto ensure that the discussion is indepth and in line with various studies and researches. In order to maintain consistencybetween the goals, an expert was appointed to review the report. The draft of VNR has been disseminated to public to obtain input and feedback via website (sdgsindonesia.or.id). 
3.2 	INCORPORATION OF THE SDGs INTO NATIONAL FRAMEWORKS 
     The Indonesia Development Planning is based on Law Number 17 Year 2007 on the National Long-term Development Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Panjang Nasional/RPJPN) for 2005-2025. Indonesiais development planning comprises of three types, namely the Long-term Development Planning (20 years/RPJPN), Medium-term (5 years/RPJMN) and Short-term (1year\0xF3and is included in the annual State Budget/APBN). The objectives of Indonesian development derive from the 1945 Constitutionis Preambule to protect the nation, promote prosperity, develop the nationis intellectual livelohood and  contribute to world peace.  The President-elect will translate his/her vision and mission into a Medium-term Development Plan. The current RPJPN is for 2005-2025 and the current RPJMN is for 2015-2019. Therefore,the 2030 Agenda which covers the period of 2015-2030 should also be integrated into the next RPJMN 2020-2025 and 2025-2030 as well as RPJPN 2025-2045. 
     The RPJMN 2015-2019 has nine priority agendas for development (Nawacita), which derives from the vision and mission of the current President to actualize national sovereignty in politics, economic, and cultural contexts. The nine priorities are: 1) Returning the state to its task of protecting all citizens and providing a safe environment; 2) Developing clean, effective, trusted and democratic governance; 3) Development of peripheral areas; 4) Reforming law enforcement agencies; 5) Improving quality of life; 6) Increasing productivity and competitiveness; 7) Promoting economic independence by developing domestic strategic sectors; 8) Overhauling the character of the nation; 9) 
Strengthening the spirit of \0xECunity in diversity and social reform. 
     To implement the SDGs, Indonesia is preparing a national action plan based on the Presidential Decree on Implementation and Achievement of Sustainable Development Goals. In this Presidential Decree, the President will directly lead the implemention of SDGs. The President will assign the Minister of National Development Planning (PPN)/ Head of Bappenas as Coordinator of the National SDG Implementation Team. The implemention team consists of government, CSO, philantrophy and business actors, academics and experts. Indonesia will also formulate a 15-year SDGs Road Map, an SDGs National Action Plan, and SDGs Regional Action Plans.  The formulation of these documents will be guided by technical guidelines for formulating action plans.  
To ensure the implementation at sub-national level, a Regional SDG 
Coordination Team will be established that also involves non-state actors. The National Coordination Team will regularly and continuously conduct coordination, capacity building, and discussions with the sub-national governments to ensure the SDGs implemention and guaranteethe fulfilment of the no-one left behind principle. A review will be conducted to measure the 
SDGs development dimensions have been integrated into National Development 
Midterm Plan 
2015-2019 
 
 

The poverty rate declined during the period of 20062016 but flattened in the last 3 years 
achievement of SDGs so that any assistance and interventions to accelerate the achievement can be done. 
3.3 	INTEGRATION OF THREE DIMENSIONS 
     Development dimensions of post-2015 agenda has been integrated in the National Development Midterm Plan (RPJMN) 2015-2019. SDGs Goals strengthen strategic priorities of Indonesia development, namely: (1) Social development including poverty reduction (Goal 1), end hunger (Goal 2), health (Goal 3), education (Goal 4) and gender equity (Goal 5); (2) Economic development including clean and affordable energi (Goal 7), decent work and economic growth (Goal 8), innovation, industry and infrastructure (Goal 9), reduce inequality (Goal 10), and patnership (Goal 17); (3) Environmental development including clean water and sanitation (Goal 6), sustainable cities and communities (Goal 11), responsible consumption and production (Goal 12), climate action (Goal 13), life below water (Goal 14) and life on land (Goal 15); and (4) Those three dimensions are supported by justice and good governance (Goal 16). 
     Substantial transformation excpected from SDGs is the internalization of sustainable and environmentally friendly behaviour in human development, economic development and sustainable livelihood. Mainstreaming SDGs into national development plan is a strategic step to implement SDGs as a national development agenda. Operationalization and implementation of sustainable behaviour into daily and bussiness activities are the next step.  
3.4 	GOALS AND TARGETS 
3.4.1 Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
     This report contains the achievement of various indicators of Goal 1. The discussion is focused on several important indicators; level of extreme poverty, percentage of population living below national poverty line, proportion of health insurance participants under the National Social Security System (Sistem Jaminan Sosial Nasional/SJSN) and other indicators. Various initiatives, significant achievements, emerging issues and lessons learned is outlined here. 
1. 	Trend Analysis  
	a. 	Poverty Alleviation 
     Poverty level in Indonesia shows a declining trend. The efforts of the Government of Indonesia to eradicate poverty are evident in the continuously declining poverty level in the last decade. The poverty level measured by Purchasing Power Parity1 (PPP) of USD 1.25 per capita/day (World Bank) was around 8.80% in 2015, a significant decrease from 28.32% in 2006 (Figure 3.2). Using the national poverty line2, 10.86% of population or 28 million inhabitants lived below the poverty line in 2016, compared to 17.75% in 2006. However, recent trend shows that the poverty reduction rate is flattened during the last 3 years, suggesting that harder work is needed in order to achieve the 2015-2019 National Medium Term Development Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Menengah Nasional/RPJMN) target of 7-8% poverty rate. 
The disparity of inter-regional poverty rate is still a challenge 
 
 

Figure 3.2.  Trends of Poverty Reduction based on PPP USD 1.25 (?) and based on the National Poverty Line (?) 
Source: World Bank and BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Figures of March) 
 
     Welfare level of the poor keeps improving. The Poverty Gap Index (P1) declined from 3.43 in 2006 to 1.94 in 2016, indicating that the gap between average expenditure of the poor andthe poverty line becomes narrower. Likewise, the Poverty Severity Index (P2) declined from 1.00 in 2006 to 0.53 in 2016. This indicates narrower distribution of expenditure imbalance among the poor (Figure 3.3) 
 

Figure 3.3.Poverty Gap Index and Severity Index for the period of 2006-2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Figures of March 2006-2016) 
 
     Inter-regional disparity is still large. The uneven distribution of poverty reduction rate presents a serious challenge.There are significant number of regions with poverty level above the national average, such as the Provinces of Papua, West Papua, and East Nusa Tenggara (see Statistical Annex Figure 1).  
Poverty incidence is generally higher in rural areas than in urban areas. 
Indonesia experienced a rapid decrease of poverty rate in rural areas during the period of 2009-2013, but the rate than flattened during the period of 2014-2016. The same trend also occurred in the urban areas during the same period.  
 
The National 
Health Insurance (JKN) was expanded in 2015 to provide social 
protection in a more comprehensive manner 
 
 
Figure 3.4. Poverty Rate in Rural Areas and Urban Areas during the period of 2009-2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia  
b. Effort on Poverty Reduction  
     The success in reducing the poverty level wasmade possible through a number of poverty alleviation programs, such as: expansion of social security coverage, fulfillment of basic needs, and several other efforts to improve community welfare. 
? Social Protection Programs 
     Indonesia has developed a compherensive social protection policies since 2015. In the 2015-2019 RPJMN, this comprehensive social protection effort is carried out through the development of the SJSN and an integrated structuring of social assistance. The development of SJSN commenced in 2014 with the implementation of the National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional/JKN) and, starting from mid-2015, was expanded with Employment Social Security scheme, which covers the Occupational Accident Benefit, Death Benefit, Old Age Benefit and Pension Benefit. The overall transformation of the SJSN is expected to be completed in 2019. 
     The JKN reached 171.9 million participants until the end of 2016 or around 66.40% of the total population (Figure 3.5). More than 90 million participants are Premium Assistance Beneficiaries (Penerima Bantuan Iuran/PBI) whose contributions are paid by the national government. The remaining participants consist of 41 million formal workers, 24.40 million informal workers, and 15.40 million participants whose contributions are paid by sub-national governments. To expand the JKN participation coverage (with a view to achieve universal health coverage), the Government Issues Healthy Indonesia Card (Kartu Indonesia Sehat/KIS) for JKN participants and has increased PBI target to cover the bottom 40% of the population by income. 
 
One of the efforts for integrated structuring of social assistance is the improvement of the Unified Database 
(BDT) 
Recipients of the 
Family Hope Program (PKH) has increased to 6 million poor families 
 
Figure 3.5. Trend of JKN Participation, 2014-2016 
Source: Social Security Administration Body for Health (BPJS Kesehatan), 2016 
 
     To accelerate poverty reduction, anintegrated structuring of social assistance was initiated by: improving the Unified Database (Basis Data Terpadu/BDT), increasing the targets of several social assistance programs, reforming the non-cash social assistance distribution method, and improving the governance. One of the breakthrough in these efforts was the integration of several non-cash assistance and subsidy programs distribution to the banking system. This was achieved through the issuance of an integrated card which includes the Family Hope Program (Program Keluarga Harapan/PKH - Conditional Cash Assistance), Non-Cash Food Subsidy (an enhanced form of Rice Subsidy), and a reformed electricity and gas energy subsidy program for the poor and vulnerable groups. Non-Cash Food Subsidy enables poor families and vulnerable groups to have wider food options, both in terms of types (e.g. rice, egg) and quantity (based on their actual needs). This non-cash distribution method engages e-warong (shops that accept the aforementioned integrated card) as the bank agent, and therefore is expected to promote local economy, enhance target accuracy, improve program transparency and accountability, and encourage financial inclusion. 
     In order to ensure that families with the lowest socio-economic status have access tobasic services, in 2016, the coverage of PKH recipients was increased from 3.50 million to 6 million poor families, targeting those with pregnant women, under 5 children, school-age children, the elderlies, and persons with disabilities. This expansion was supported by the strengthening of governance and program effectiveness in reaching poor families in Underdeveloped, Border and Islands Areas (Daerah Tertinggal, Perbatasan, dan Kepulauan/DTPK). To program improvement various efforts put in places, including improving the capacity and welfare of PKH recipient families through Family Development Session (FDS). The FDS is held monthly for PKH recipient mothers in order to learn the modules of parenting, health and nutrition, child protection, and family financial management. 
     
 
 
Figure 3.6. Trend of PKH Budget Allocation (n) and Total Participants (n) 
Source: Ministry of Social Affairs, various years reporting 
 
c. Access to Basic Services 
? Delivery at Health Facilities and Complete Basic Immunization for Children 

Delivery at health facilities, which is essential to reduce maternal mortality 
Most indicators of access to basic services have increased 
rate, shows an increasing trend. Total delivery at health facilities in 2007 was 46% and increased to 63.20% in 2012 (Demography and Health Survey of Indonesia/SDKI). A higher increase form 21.90% (2007) to 42.50% (2012) is found for population at the buttom 40% (population by income) 
     Immunization coverage shows a decreasing trend (SDKI).  The percentage of children aged 12-23 months who obtained complete basic immunization based on the records ofChildis Road to Health Card (Kartu Menuju Sehat/KMS) has declined from 73.30% (2007) to 66.70% (2012). The same trend also occurs at the bottom 40% of population by income, where the coverage has declined from 68.10% (2007) to 59.70% (2012). This suggests that the implementation of immunization for the poor was lower than the higher income group. This reflectsunequal access to health service that needs to be addressed in order to secure demographic bonus in 2020-2030. 
 

Highest Income Group
National Average
Bottom 40% of population by income





66.7



59.7



68.1

Highest Income Group
National Average
Bottom 40% of population by income





63.2
46.1
42.5






21.9

73.3
79.2
73.3
 88.1 83.3
	0	20	40	60	80	100
\0xEF 2007 \0xEF 2012
Figure 3.7. Achievement of Delivery at Health Facilities and Complete Basic Immunization 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (SDKI, 2007 and 2012) 
? Contraceptive Prevalence Rate (CPR) of All Methods among Married Couples at Fertile-Age of 15-49 Years (Pasangan Usia Subur/ PUS)  
     The CPR of all methods at the poor and vulnerable community (bottom 40% of population by income) has declined from 64.53% (2015) to 64.28% (2016) (see Statistical Annex Table 1). This is an issue of concern, and education efforts for the poor and vulnerable community are needed on the benefit of using contraceptive. This is important, not only to increase the CPR, but also to improve the welfare of poor families. 
? Birth Certificate Ownership 
     In order to ensure that no one is left behind, everyone should be recorded in Civil Registry Office. The Government encourages ownership of Birth Certificate, particularly among the poor, which provides access to community services. In 2016, the percentage of poor and vulnerable population aged 0-17 years (bottom 40% of population by income) who own birth certificate was lower than that of the highest 20% group. 
     This shows that the coverage of birth certificate ownership by the poor and vulnerable population aged 0-17 years (bottom 40% of population by income) still needs to be continuously improved. An example of special efforts for this purpose is the \0xECtake home birth certificate after delivery program, which is carried out by the local government of Banyuwangi Regency. Through this program, all health facilities that assist delivery of a mother ensures that the infantis birth certificate is issuedsoon after the delivery process. Some other examples of special efforts to improve birth certificate ownership, particularly in underdeveloped regions are, among others, educational program, mobile court service, and the completion of regional regulatory framework. 
 

Figure 3.8. Percentage of Population Aged 0-17 Years Who Owns Birth Certificate Based on Welfare Level 
Source: Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas, based on BPS-Statistics Indonesia data (March 2016) 
 
? Net Enrollment Rate (NER) 
     The net enrollment rate at Primary Level (SD/MI/Equivalency Program) of boys in the poor and vulnerable community group has increased from 96.66% (2015) to 96.96% (2016), which shows that more boys aged 7-12 years from the poor and vulnerable groups were able to utilize Primary Level education facilities.  
 

Figure 3.9. Net Enrollment Rate for Bottom 40% of Population by Income 
Source: Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas, based on BPS-Statistics 
Indonesia data (March 2015 and 2016) 
 
Meanwhile, there was a slight decrease of Primary Level NER of girls from 97.08% (2015) to 96.89% (2016). At the Junior High School Level (SMP/MTs/Equivalency Program), the NER increased for both boys (from 72.02% in 2015 to 72.21% in 2016) and girls (from 76.37% in 2015 to 77.94% in 2016). This shows that for both boys and girls, there were more children aged 13-15 years from the poor and vulnerable groups who were able to utilize the Junior High School Level education facilities. A different trend is shown for the NER at the Senior High School Level (SMA/SMK/MA/Equivalency Program), where the NER of girls increased from 52.51% (2015) to 52.89% (2016), while that of boys declined from 48.63% (2015) to 47.15% (2016). One of the reasons for this decrease was because some boys in the poor and vulnerable families had to work, hence they could not complete their education. 
? Improved Access to Clean Water and Sanitation Facilities, Quality Urban Housing, and Electricity 
     Access to clean water, particularly for the poor (bottom 40% of population by income) is continuously improved. Clean water is defined to include, among others, tap water, public tap water, rainwater reservoir, as well as artesian and pump wells. It does not include packed/bottled water and water from commercial vendor or tank. The proportion of poor and vulnerable groups that had obtained access to clean water was 61.94% in 2016, slightly increased from 61.57% in 2015 (See Statistical Annex Table 1). In addition, access to improved sanitation facilities for the poor and vulnerable groups also increased from 47.76% in 2015 to 54.12% in 2016 (see Statistical Annex Table 1). The Government has set a target of 100% provision of decent sanitation facilities by 2019. 
     Moreover, housing quality in urban areas is also continuously improved. As a result, the percentage of urban slum households at the bottom 40% of population by income (poor and vulnerable groups) has reduced from 12.60% in 2015 to 10.53% in 2016 (see Statistical Annex Table 1). 
     With regard to the access of the community to electricity, the percentage of poor and vulnerable households (bottom 40% of population by income) with access to electricity has increased from 95.74% (2015) to 96.22% (2016) (see Statistical Annex Table 1). This increase will improve their life quality, for example in terms of creating the opportunity for children to study outside school hours, which will enhance education quality. 
 
d. Develop Disaster Resilience of the Poor and Vulnerable Groups 
	? 	Basic Services for Disaster Victims 

Poor households tend to live and work in areas that are prone to disaster, 
The Government provides basic services assistance to poor households that are vulnerable to disaster impacts 
The Government has coped with various challenges in reducing poverty 
thus are vulnerable to disaster. Areas with high density of poor population tend to experience a high frequency of disaster. The majority of people whose livelihoods depend on weather and climate with the highest disaster risk impacts (such as El Nino/draught) are poor households, such as farmers, and small scale fishermen. 
     The number of natural disaster victims, particularly the poor and vulnerable groups, who received government assistance, increased from 66,625 in 2010 to 200,000 in 2014. Likewise, the total number of disaster response officers increased from 5,310 in 2010 to 5,740 in 2014 (See Statistical Annex Table 2). 
     Furthermore, the number of social disaster victims who received government assistance, among others in the forms of emergency and social recovery assistance, increased from 6,700 in 2010 to 20,569 in 2014 (see Statistical Annex Table 2). The provision of basic services for social disaster victims at the disaster site cannot be separated from the strong and dedicated support of youth social volunteers (Taruna Siaga Bencana/Tagana) and pioneer staff. The size of pioneer staff that have been established and received training has increased from 100 persons in 2010 to 295 persons in 2014. 
2. Challenges and Improvement Measures  
     Apart from the achievements, several challenges were still found in poverty reduction. Those challenges and their improvement measures are as follows: 
a. Improving integrated data management. Household welfare level is a dynamic index and data may not systematically update. As a result, the function of one data policy as a reference for poverty alleviation programs is not optimal yet. Data collection for the bottom 40% of population by income has been periodically undertaken in 2005, 2008, 2011, and 2015. The data has been calculated to determine different levels of welfare. In 2015, data was also updated at the village level (Desa/Kelurahan) in order to assess whether there are beneficiaries of government social assistance schemes who do not meet eligibility criteria. When there are such beneficiaries, they were thus replaced with more eligible candidates. The results were integrated in the Unified Database (Basis Data Terpadu/BDT) of 2015.  
b. Refinement of poverty alleviation programs. Some poverty alleviation programs, at both national and sub-national levels, are not yet synergized in order to eradicate the roots of poverty in many regions. This lacks of synergy becomes challenges in developing various innovations to eradicate poverty in an effective and targeted manner, such as poverty eradication in underdeveloped, border and islands areas; urban poverty; and programs to improve working capacity of the poor and vulnerable groups.  
c. Making the government budget effective for the acceleration of poverty reduction. Various government budgets are still not quite effective and synergized to accelerate poverty reduction. Pro-poor planning and budgeting will continue to be undertaken. Various direct transfers of Government funds to the sub-national levels (Block Grant, Specific Allocation Grant, and Village Fund) are continuously increased to ensure more equitable provision of basic services, and effective alleviation of poverty problems. The Government also promotes alternative funding sources other than the National Budget (APBN), such as Cooperation between Government and Business Entities for Infrastructure Development, including social infrastructure, which has been stipulated in the Presidential Decree No. 38 of 2015. 
d. Strengthening institutional framework for coordination of poverty alleviation programs. Synchronized achievement of poverty reduction target is sometimes obstructed by ineffective coordination in the implementation of poverty alleviation programs in various regions. Low capacity of poverty alleviation institutions can also hamper the achievement of various development targets as set by the planning document. To address such issues, measures put in place including coordination strengthening and improving institutional capacity of poverty eradication programs at the national and sub-national levels in order to encourage innovations to overcome vulnerability, poverty and inequality. 
e. Empowering the poor. Poverty alleviation efforts are still characterized by the vulnerability of many inhabitants to become poor. Improving working capacity of the poor and vulnerable groups is very important to continuously increase welfare and income (such as: access to employment, business, funding and skill). The improvement measures include training to improve working capacity of youth and women, mentoring and training by production and marketing counselors, financing access for Micro, Small and Medium Scale Enterprises, and strengthening of production inputs, such as: supply chain in urban areas; access to fertilizers, seed and pesticides; identifying regional comparative advantage; productivity improvement of the industrial sector to create jobs in urban areas; development of agro-industry in rural areas; and the National Financial Inclusion Program to guarantee effective functioning of the financial system in covering all residents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts 

In order to achieve the poverty reduction target of 7-8% at the end of the 
Innovation to reduce poverty through the application of 
SJSN, BDT, PIT, 
DAK, and TNP2K 
2015-2019 National Medium Term Development Plan (Rencana Pembangunan Jangka Menengah Nasional/RPJMN), and for the sustainability of poverty reduction, the Government has endeavored various measures and innovations, as follows: 
1. In accordance with Law No. 40 of 2004 on National Social Security System 
(Sistem Jaminan Sosial Nasional/SJSN), as well as Law No. 24 of 2011 on Social Security Administration Body (Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Sosial/BPJS), innovation undertaken to achieve universal coverage, includes: 
a) Provision of health insurance to the poor whose contribution is paid by the government through the Premium Assistance Beneficiaries Program 
(Penerima Bantuan Iuran/PBI).  
b) Improvement of access to and quality of health services for all population groups and regions. 
2. The Government of Indonesia is committed to implement comprehensive social protection. The distribution of social assistance, which had previously been provided in cash or in kind, is gradually being integrated into the noncash mechanism through an integrated card and by using the banking system. Besides improving the efficiency and accountability of assistance distribution, this system also promotes financial inclusion of the poor and vulnerable groups into various financial accesses. The draft Presidential Decree on this matter is currently being finalized to provide the basis for coordination and integration of non-cash social assistance. Several subsidies, such as food and energy, are also integrated through this approach in order to be well-targeted. 
3. In order to ensure data updating, population data synchronization and effective implementation of poverty reduction program, the Unified Database (Basis Data Terpadu/BDT) is continuously verified and validated. The Government is currently developing an Independent Registration Mechanism (Mekanisme Pendaftaran Mandiri/MPM) to enable the poor and vulnerable groups, who are not yet registered and thus have not received basic services, to self-register with the head of village (Lurah/Kepala Desa) nearest to their domicile. This MPM data is gradually verified and validated at the sub-national and national levels in order to finalize the registration process and make adjustment of their participation in the social protection and poverty alleviation programs. 
4. The Government has also undertaken a national program to accelerate and expand the ownership of civil registry documents. Such documents with significant roles for poverty alleviation include birth certificate, change of child status, marriage/divorce certificate, death certificate, and domicile certificate. In this regard, a draft Presidential Decree on National Strategy of Civil Registration and Vital Statistics (CRVS) 2017-2024 is being formulated, with the aim to ensure that each Indonesian citizen and resident are properly recorded, served and protected. 
5. Indonesia Electrification Program (Program Indonesia Terang/PIT) has been launched as an effort of the government to improve access to electricity. Its implementation commenced in 2016, starting from the eastern part of Indonesia to the west. This program uses renewable energy in order to reach remote and geographically isolated villages that are difficult to be accessed by National Electricity Company (Perusahaan Listrik Negara/PLN). 
6. The Government continuous to promote the decentralization to enhance the authority of sub-national governments in serving and fulfilling basic needs of the community. One of the policy instruments is the Specific Allocation Grant (Dana Alokasi Khusus/DAK), which currently covers: (i) regular DAK for general basic services; (ii) affirmative DAK for infrastructure development and basic services at special locus (district level); and (iii) assigned DAK to support the attainment of national priorities that fall under the authority of sub-national government. Such DAK is further elaborated based on regional affairs and national priorities. For example, DAK for Health consists of: (i) regular DAK for the basic health services, referral service, and pharmacy service; (ii) affirmative DAK for the strengthening of Community Health Center (Pusat Kesehatan Masyarakat/Puskesmas) with three locus criteria, namely border area, remote area, and transmigration area; and (iii) assigned DAK for the strengthening of Referral Hospitals at the national, provincial, and regencies/municipalities levels; priority tourism areas; as well as blood transfusion unit services in several regions. 
7. The Government is also developing a public expenditure advocacy model in order to strengthen poverty alleviation programs. This advocacy model is intended to: i) improve the relevance of policy direction, program and Regional Government Budget (Anggaran Penerimaan dan Belanja Daerah/APBD) allocation based on the need for poverty alleviation intervention, and ii) consolidate the expenditure of National Government and Sub-National Governments at the provincial and regency/municipal levels. This model is provided for sub-national governments in order to improve their implementation capacity and strengthen political support for regional heads as the decision makers and policy formulators. 
8. The Government has advanced integrated multi-stakeholders coordination measures to overcome poverty. The Government, through the Presidential Decree No. 15 of 2010 on Poverty Alleviation Acceleration, which was renewed by the Presidential Decree No. 96 of 2015, has established the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (Tim Nasional Percepatan Penanggulangan Kemiskinan/TNP2K) under direct coordination of the Vice President. The TNP2K coordinates with the Regional Coordination Team for Poverty Reduction (Tim Koordinasi Penanggulangan Kemiskinan Daerah/TKPKD), which is responsible to the Deputy Heads of Regions. 
	4. 	Emerging Issues 
 
	? 	Multidimensional Poverty 

Poverty is not only related to the lack of income or consumption, but is 
Poverty is multidimensional and not only measured by income alone 
also related to multidimensional problems, such as education, health and living standard, that cause persons to remain in deprived condition. Although poverty level has decreased nationally, there are still population groups and regions bound by poverty that needs special policy intervention, such as underdeveloped, border and islands areas, whose geography makes regular 
implementation highly challenged. The BPS-Statistics Indonesia has constantly endeavored to refine the methodology and utilize various macro and micro data. This will assist the government to ascertain multidimensional poverty in order to improve poverty alleviation programs to be effective in identifying the roots causes of poverty, which are different in each region.  
	? 	Child Poverty 

Child poverty is an important issue for Indonesiais poverty reduction 
Child poverty causes young generation to become less productive with low capacity  
strategy. Better understanding on the characteristics of child poverty will strengthen the governmentis policy intervention in fulfilling the need of children. The need of children is different from the need of adults, since children are still growing and developing. Poverty problems faced by children are not limited to monetary aspect alone. Children at poor families are deprived from various aspects of life which hinders their full development potential. This causes some of Indonesiais youth become less productive with low capacity, so that they may be less competitive compared to youth from other countries. Although the Government has implemented various social protection programs in order to ensure the availability of basic services for all children, there are still many children from poor families who are facing obstacles in accessing basic services. Therefore, child welfare needs to be measured from various aspects of life in order to comprehend the complexity of the problems. 
     In 2009, child poverty rate was 17% based on national poverty line, meanwhile, if measured by USD 1.25 PPP, the rate was 22%. The child poverty rate shows a declining trend during the period of 2009-2016, namely from 17% to 13%. When measured by the national poverty line, the child poverty rate in urban areas is comparatively lower to that in rural areas (13% in urban areas and 
21% in rural areas in 2009; 11% in urban areas and 18% in rural areas in 2012). 
 

Figure 3.10. Child Poverty Rate 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia and The World Bank 
 
 
 
 
	5. 	Lessons Learned 
 
a. Development of Unified Database for Social Protection Programs 

The development of the Unified Database (Basis Data Terpadu/BDT) 
The development of BDT promotes the sharpening and complementarity of 
promotes the sharpening and complementarity of programs. By using BDT, the targeting of poverty alleviation programs on the same target groups becomes more focus.  
 
programs \0xEF Before Unified Database* \0xEF: . . . : .\0xEF.. \0x2211:\0x2211 . - . .. After Unified Database** . Impleme. nt t.. h. e Pro.. " gra poverty alleviation 
	.. . . , . 	.. , . 	.. . 	.. 
	\0xEF:\0x2211 . . 	. 	. .. 	m 
	. 	. \0xEF:. 
	D 	D 	D 
	D 	D 
	FIHii::11 	EIH!fi::13 FIH!ii:+i FIH!Hii 
\0xEFEvery implementing aaency has their own list of beneficiaries 	\0xEF\0xEFunified Database to identify proa:ram beneficiaries based on specific criteria from implementing agencies 	 

Figure 3.11. Comparison of Targeting Process of Before and 
After Unified Database 
Source: TNP2K 
The Government has developed BDT that contains information by name by address, covering households in the bottom 40% of population by income. The initial household data in developing BDT is periodically updated through the Social Protection Program Data Collection by BPS-Statistics Indonesia. The BDT is managed by the Ministry of Social Affairs and TNP2K. 
b. Utilization of BDT for Refinement Program Locations 
     The BDT is available for 21 Ministries and Institutions with 56 access to data resources provided. In addition, BDT is also used by 31 provinces and 308 
The utilization of BDT sharpens the poverty analysis and mapping 
regencies/municipalities with, respectively, 65 and 513 access to data resources provided. The public may also access the data through the BDT website, although the available data is more limited. Continuous expansion of BDT usage as the basis for analysis and poverty mapping will sharpen the deliberations of the Government and various stakeholders to reach pockets of poverty, develop various basic needs fulfillment and business opportunity innovations, as well as implement pro-poor planning and budgeting.  
c. Government Efforts to Assist Households Post Fuel Price Adjustment: 
Unconditional Assistance 
     
The unconditional assistance is a shortterm compensation 

Trend proportion of population with minimum calorie intake below 1400 Kcal/capita/day fluctuated from 2006-2016, but decreased from 
2012-2016 
The trend of  stunting prevalence declined in 20072016, but the proportion remains high 
The Government policy to strengthen healthy economy by reducing Fuel Subsidy has the potential to reduce community welfare, particularly the poor and vulnerable households. Therefore, the Government prepared anticipative measures in order to maintain the community welfare level, particularly the low income community, by preparing the unconditional assistance program as a short term compensation. 
 
3.4.2  Goal 2. End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
     The Voluntary National Review (VNR) Goal 2, Zero Hunger discusses several important indicators of the targets to end hunger, to achieve food security and to improve nutrition and to promote sustainable agriculture. The discussion covers an analysis of trends and successes, challenges and means to overcome them, innovations and important efforts made, emerging issues and lessons.  
1. Trends and Analysis 
a. End Hunger 
     The National Socio Economic Survey (Survei Sosial Ekonomi Nasional/ Susenas) reported a trend in the proportion of population with a minimum calorie intake below 1400 Kcal/capita/day (Figure 3.12) that fluctuated for quintile 1 from 2006 to 2016. However, since 2012 the minimum calorie intake of the poorest population (quintile 1) decreased from 41.8% to 32.8% in 2016. The same pattern occured for the proportion of the population in quintiles 2 to 5. Among the 5 quintiles, the highest consumption of minimum calorie intake is found in the poorest population. 
37.64
Figure 3.12. Proportion of thePopulation with a Calorie 
Intake/Capita/Daybelow 1400 Kcal Based on Quintile for 2006-2016 
Source: BPS-Statistic Indonesia, Susenas 
b. End All Forms of Malnutrition 
     The prevalence of stunting in children under five years of age declined over the last 10 years, however the proportion remains high at 33.6% by 2016. Although the prevalence of stunting in children under two years of age shows a downward trend, it is still quite high at 26.1% (2016) (Figure 3.13), when the age of children from birth to two years is a critical period in achieving optimal development potential. The prevalence of wasting children under five years of age decreased significantly from 13.6% (2007) to 9.8% in 2016 (Figure 3.14). 
     
	Stunting in Children Under Five 	Stunting in Children Under Two 
 	 

Figure 3.13. The Prevalence of Stunting in Children under Five and Two 
Years of Age, 2007-2016 
Note: * 2016: Results of Sirkesnas Interim Analysis 
Source: Basic Health Research Indonesia (Riset Kesehatan 
Dasar/Riskesdas) 2007, 2010, and 2013, National Health Indicator Survey (Survei Indikator Kesehatan Nasional/Sirkesnas) 2016 

Figure 3.14. Prevalence of Wasting Children Under Five Years of Age, 2007-
2016 
Note: * Results of Sirkesnas Interim Analysis 2016 
Source: Riskesdas 2007 - 2013, Sirkesnas 2016 
 
The problem of malnutrition among under five children is closely linked to poverty. The impact of poverty is significant on inadequate nutritional intake which ultimately leads to a lower intelligence and productivity 
	and 	a 	higher 	risk 	of 	non-
communicable diseases in their adulthood. Districts with a high proportion of poor tend to have a high prevalence of stunting. 
 
 
Figure 3.15.Linkage Between Stunting and 
Poverty 
Source: Trihono, et al., 2015 
Community 
nutritional status is closely linked to education and poverty 
Prevalence of anemia among 
pregnant women 
increased during 2007-
2016 
     Furthermore, nutritional status is also linked to education and environmental conditions. Education affects behavior on parenting and eating patterns. The lower the level of education of parents the poorer the nutritional status of the children. Environmental health conditions such as access to sanitation and clean water also affects the child's nutritional status. 
c. Prevalence of Anemia in Pregnant Women 
     The prevalence of anemia among pregnant women increased from 24.5% (2007) to 54.9% (2016). Prevalence of chronic energy deficiency (CED) among pregnant women and women of childbearing age (non-pregnant women) also increased. Anemia and CED in pregnant and women of childbearing age may result in fetal growth faltering, maternal mortality risk, low birth weight (LBW) infants, miscarriages, and premature births. The greatest risk occurs among young women. 
	Pregnant Women 	Non-Pregnant Women 

 
Figure 3.16. Percentage of CED in pregnant and non-pregnant women by age group 
Source: Riskesdas 2007 and 2013 
d. Percentage of Infants Under 6 Months Receiving Exclusive Breast Milk 
 
Exclusive breastfeeding coverage of infants aged 6 
months increases in 2010-2013, but remains low 
 
Figure 3.17.Percentage of Exclusive Breastfeeding2007-2013 
Source: Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey (IDHS) 2007 and 2012, Riskesdas 2010 and 2013 
 
     The nutritional status of under five children is not only influenced by the nutritional status of pregnant women but also influenced by exclusive 
     
The quality of food consumption is improving that is indicated by higher score of DDP 
Production of food crops and livestock increased during 20062015 
breastfeeding patterns. The 2007 and 2012 IDHS data revealed an increase coverage of exclusive breastfeeding in infants aged 6 months from 17.8% to 27.1%. Riskesdas data also showed that exclusive breastfeeding coverage increased from 15.3% (2010) to 30.2% (2013). However, results of the Sirkesnas interim analysis showed exclusive breastfeeding coverage decreased to 22.8% in 2016 
e. Quality of Food Consumption 
     The quality of food consumption is improving that is indicated by higher score of desirable dietary pattern (DDP) from 75.7 (2009) to 85.2 (2015). In urban areas DDP score (89.4) is higher than in rural areas (79.9)in 2015. This shows that food availability, food diversity, community knowledge on food and nutrition, physical and economic accessibility of urban are better than rural communities. 
 
Table3.1.  Desirable Dietary Pattern (DDP) Score, 2009-2015 
Description 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
 Indonesia 
75.7 
85.7 
85.6 
83.5 
81.4 
83.4 
85.2 
Urban 
78.2 
88.0 
87.3 
86.3 
84.0 
86.0 
89.4 
Rural 
73.3 
83.5 
83.7 
80.5 
78.4 
80.5 
79.9 
	I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I 	I 
Source: Food Security Agency, Ministry of Agriculture, 2016 
 
f. Agricultural Productivity 
     Production of carbohydrates (rice, corn, sweet potato, and cassava) and protein sources continues to increase. Over the last 10 years, production of rice, corn, sweet potato and cassava has increased by 3.7%; 6.3%; 2.6%and 1.1% per year respectively. Beef production increased 3.1% per year. The increase in the production of eggs and chicken is relatively high, around 4.5% and 5.7% per year. 
 
Year 
Rice 
Corn 
Soybean 
Sweet Potato 
Cassava 
Beef 
Eggs 
Chicken 
2006 
54,455 
11,609 
0.748 
1,854 
19,987 
396 
1,011 
1,202 
2007 
57,157 
13,289 
0.593 
1,887 
19,988 
339 
1,162 
1,238 
2008 
60,326 
16,317 
0.776 
1,882 
21,757 
392 
1,123 
1,292 
2009 
64,399 
17,630 
0.975 
2,058 
22,039 
409 
1,070 
1,300 
2010 
66,469 
18,328 
0.907 
2,051 
23,918 
437 
1,121 
1,539 
2011 
65,757 
17,643 
0.851 
2,196 
24,044 
485 
1,215 
1,665 
2012 
69,056 
19,387 
0.843 
2,483 
24,177 
509 
1,337 
1,734 
2013 
71,280 
18,512 
0.780 
2,388 
23,937 
505 
1,419 
1,895 
2014 
70,846 
19,009 
0.955 
2,383 
23,436 
498 
1,429 
1,939 
2015 
75,398 
19,612 
0.963 
2,298 
21,801 
507 
1,481 
2,031 
% / year 
3.72 
6.31 
4.17 
2.56 
1.08 
3.11 
4.50 
5.74 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia for food crop commodities and the Ministry of Agriculture for livestock commodities (various publications). 
Table3.2. Production of Food Commodities (000 tons), 2006-2015. 
Indonesia has a genetic bank of crops and livestock to create High Yielding Varieties 
More than 95% of Indonesia's paddies covering 14.2 
million ha uses VUB rice 
     High Yielding Varieties (Varietas Unggul Baru/VUB) of plants and livestockhave been developed and promoted. By 2015, Indonesia had released 403 VUB of inbred rice and 100 VUB of hybrid rice. During the last 6years (2010-2015) the Minister of Agriculture had released 57 VUB of rice, 25 VUB of corn, and 10 VUB of soybeans. The VUB rice were designed to be utilized in various agro-ecosystems, of which 32 were developed on irrigated and/or rainfed lands, 10 on dry land and 6 in swamplands (Table 3.3).  
 
Table3.3. Release of High Yielding Varieties (Varietas 
UnggulBaru/VUB) of Rice, Corn, and Soybeans, 2010-2015 
Variety 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
  Total 2010-2015 
Rice 
10 
17 
12 
8 
5 
5 
57 
1. Inbred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Rice Field 
6 
5 
10 
3 
4 
4 
32 
b. Dry Land 
3 
3 
1 
2 
- 
1 
10 
c. Swampland 
1 
3 
1 
- 
1 
- 
6 
2. Hybrid 
- 
6 
- 
3 
- 
- 
9 
Corn 
5 
7 
3 
5 
3 
2 
25 
1. Inbred 
- 
2 
- 
2 
- 
- 
4 
2. Hybrid 
5 
5 
3 
3 
3 
2 
21 
Soybean 
- 
1 
1 
4 
3 
1 
10 
3. Inbred 
- 
1 
1 
4 
3 
1 
10 
Source: Annual Report Agricultural Research and Development Agency, Ministry of Agriculture, 2010, 2011,2012,2013, 2014, 2015. Jakarta 
 
     Utilization of various crop varieties of breeder in the country is quite intensive and widespread. In 2016, over 95% of Indonesia's paddies covering 14.2 million ha uses VUB rice. During 2006-2015, only about 52% of the average total rice seed demand (336 thousand tons) used certified high yielding seeds. Approximately 56% of corn farms use imported hybrid corn seeds. For soybean seeds, domestic seed production is still relatively low, only about 35% of the national demand. 
     The Minister of Agriculture released domestic hens VUB breedscalled KUB-1 in 2014 and broiler chickens VUB breeds called SenSi in 2017. Meanwhile, ducks VUB called Mojomaster-1 Agrinak and Alabimaster-1 Agrinak were released in 2015.  Domba Compass Agrinak, a Sumatran composite sheep (genetic composition 50% of local sheep, 25% St. Croix, 25% Barbados Blackbelly) that had been bred since 1986, was released in 2014 by the Minister of Agriculture. 
Food and nutritional challenges, among others: transportation/ logistic systems; scarcity of land and water resources; limited access to food and inadequate knowledge of the community on balanced nutrition; coordination of food and nutrition improvement across stakeholders 
     Several of local breeds are being at risk of extinction.3 For example, the Gembrong Goatis at risk because the current population is only 52 goats. The Domestic Animal Diversity Information System (DAD-IS) reported that there are 146 indigenous and local livestock breeds, 89 of them are local breeds (buffalo 11, cattle 13, goats 10, sheep 8, chickens 31, and ducks 18). Indonesia develops and utilizes these genetic resources to improve the supply of animal protein and to preserve the genetic resources. 2. Challenges and Improvement Measures 
a. Challenges 
1) The archipelagic characteristics and transportation/logistic systems remain a challenge to distribute food that leads to volatility and fluctuations in food prices. Consequently, this impacts food affordability for the poorest quintile to meet the minimum calorie intake. 
2) Changes in food consumption patterns to non-local foods, especially flour. This hinders efforts to diversify food consumption patterns. It is also raises concerns on the dependence of food consumption on imported food. At the local level, the diversification of consumption of local food is expected to be able to drive the economy ofthe local communities. 
3) Scarcity of land and water resources. Food production capacity will also face constraints due to decreasing quantity, quality, and continuity of natural resources. Land and water resources are becoming increasingly rare from year to year. Continuous of population growth and industrialization will increase pressure to agricultural land. Moreover, land degradation is also expected to bemore massive. Climate change will also become an increasingly alarming issue in relation to national food production. 
4) Limited access to food and inadequate knowledge of the community on balanced nutrition causes the fulfillment of nutritional adequacy is not optimal. Maternal education and inadequate parenting practices shown by the low coverage of exclusive breastfeeding contribute to the nutritional problems in Indonesia. Furthermore, the lack of community empowerment to improve nutrition status also leads to irregular monitoring of the growth of children weight and height. Therefore, early malnutrition detection could not be done optimally. 
5) Nutrition-sensitive interventions such as provision of clean water, sanitation, access to food, access to education services and women's empowerment; and nutrition-specific interventions such as micronutrient supplementation and supplementary feeding have been carried out. However, these interventions are not integrated optimally due to lack of knowledge and communication among program managers. Thus, it only brings low leverage to acceleration of  nutritionimprovement. In addition, the commitment of stakeholders, especially at the local level to implement multistakeholder interventions formulated in the Food and Nutrition Action 
Plan are not translated into operational actions. Moreover, nutrition 
                                               
*) According to the Decree of the Minister of Agriculture No. 117 of 2014 a livestock breed is not at risk if a breed has aproductive male to female ratio of 20:40 (cattle and water buffaloes), 20:50 (goats, sheep and pigs), 20: 200 (chicken, ducks, geese). The status of the breed is at risk when it isin a condition that is leading to the loss of the genetic resources of the livestock. 
 
     
improvement interventions that have been proven to be effective through various pilot projects have not been able to be scaled up due to resource constraints.  
6) The gap between regions in reducing nutritional problems is another challenge. In 2013, there were 15 out of 34 provinces that showed a serious stunting issue where sunting prevalence is more than 40%. 
 
b. Improvement Measures 
     To overcome these challenges, an integrated food and nutrition development approach is needed. Policies on food production and supply need to be directed to provide adequate, diversified, balanced, and safe food, at affordable price to most people. In addition, the government needs to strengthen the policies to ensure food accesibility and to promote balanced nutrition/dietary behavior, adequate parenting practices, and access to health services such as immunization. Policy instruments to address these challenges include: 
Improvement measures, among others: 
intensification of agricultural research and development; issuance of local regulations on sustainable agriculture; accelerate the implementation of 1000 HPK. 
1) 
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
Intensify continous agricultural research and development to create innovative agricultural technology and agricultural institutional engineering that can improve productivity, business efficiency, and competitive products in domestic and international markets. 
Accelarate the issuance of local regulations on the land allocation for sustainable agriculture and new potential agricultural land. 
Build and rehabilitate agricultural infrastructures, promote/facilitate private investment in rural agribusiness, and empower smallholder farmers and farmer groups to improve productivity, business efficiency and product competitiveness. 
Improve post-harvest handling and its distribution to final consumers to significantly reduce food loss. 
Intensify socialization to decision makers, program managers, and the general public on the importance of quality food consumption and good nutrition for health and productivity, including socialization of a food consumption pattern namely diversified, nutritionally balanced and safe (Beragam, Bergizi Seimbang dan Aman/B2SA) that is based on local products.  
Improve coordination and operationalization of Food and Nutrition Action Plan documents at the central and local levels, including increasing participation of philantrophy and businesses, CSOs, academics and development partners in improving food and nutrition. 
Accelerate the implementation of the First 1000 Days of Life Movement 
(Gerakan 1000 Hari Pertama Kehidupan/HPK) through an integrated interventions to reduce the prevalence of stunting and other forms of malnutrition. The right nutrition of the first 1,000 days between a womanis pregnancy and her childis 2nd birthday is a window of opportunity that has a profound impact on a childis ability to grow, learn and thrive and a lasting effect on a countryis health and prosperity. Malnutrition early in life can cause irreversible damage to childrenis brain development and their physical growth, leading to a diminished capacity to learn, poorer performance in school, greater susceptibility to infection and disease and a lifetime of lost earning potential. 
     
Food and nutrition innovations, among others: Presidential Decree No. 42 of 2013/on SUN movement; national and regional action plan on food and nutrition; Integration of sensitive and specific intervention with 
poverty alleviation program; BULOG as national agency to maintain food availability and price stability 
8) Implement regional development approach and strengthen the provision of supporting data to reduce the gap between regions. 
 
 
 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts 
     Various innovations and key efforts related to the achievement of the SDG Goal 2 Zero Hunger have been developed and implemented by the government with stakeholders in food and nutrition improvement, include: 
a. In terms of regulation and policy, several regulations that support efforts to accelerate the nutritionimprovement have been enacted.  
i. The policy on nutrition improvement that focuses on  Gerakan 1000 HPK under the Presidential DecreeNo. 42 of 2013 concerning the National Movement for the Acceleration of Nutrition Improvement. This policy integrates health services, specifically maternal and child health and diseases control through a cross-sectoral approach.  
ii. The National Action Plan on Food and Nutrition (Rencana Aksi Nasional Pangan dan Gizi/RAN-PG) was formulated for the period of 2005-2010; 2011-2015, and 2015-2019, followed by the formulation  of the Regional Action Plan on  Food and Nutrition (Rencana Aksi Daerah Pangan dan Gizi /RAD-PG) at the provincial and district levels. Currently, Presidential Decree on Strategic Policy on Food and Nutrition (Kebijakan dan Strategi Pangan dan Gizi/KS-PG)is being drafted to be a guideline in integrating food and nutrition improvement intervention. 
iii. Efforts to fulfill children's rights to the best nutrition and to protect motheris rights to exclusively breastfeed are supported by Government Regulation No. 33 of 2012 concerning on Exclusive Breastfeeding. iv. As one of the first countries from the 59 countries that joined ScallingUp Nutrition (SUN) Global Movement, Indonesia has developed and implemented the SUN platform through advocacy to the highest level leaders, increased stakeholder participation (philantrophy and businesses, CSOs, academics and development partners), ensured coherent policies through program legal framework, aligned relevant programs to the SUN Movement framework, and identified sources of fund. 
b. Integration of sensitive and specific intervention components has been done butstill limited both in design and scope, for example the pilot project to integrate nutrition-specific interventionsand sensitive interventions such as sanitation i.e. the National Community Empowerment Program for Healthy and Smart Generation (Program National Pemberdayaan Masyarakat Generasi Sehat dan Cerdas/PNPM-GSC),  and the Prestasi Family Hope Program (PKH) achievement. Currently, a design of integration of nutrition improvement interventions with basic social services such as clean water and sanitation, birth certification services, health insurance, and community empowerment is being developed.  
c. Non-cash food subsidy (an enhanced form of rice subsidy) for the poor that enable people from the lowest quintile to have wider food options (e.g rice and  egg) and quantity based on their actual needs to meet the minimum 
     

dietary intake. This subsidy is implemented through poverty alleviation prgram.  
d. Policies on central and local government food reserves; food diversification and community nutrition improvement; food crisis criteria and response; distribution, trade, and food subsidy; as well as food and nutrition information system (Government Regulation No. 17 of 2015 concerning Food Security and Nutrition). 
e. Assignment to National Logistic Agency (Badan Urusan Logistik/ BULOG) to maintain food availability and price stability at the producer and consumer levels for 11 food commodities, through management of government food reserves, food distribution, and development of foodbased industries (Presidential Decree No. 48 of 2016 concerning Assignment of BULOG for Food Security).  
f. Empowerment of rural communities to be more self-sufficient in food availability andsecurity, through among others, the Village Food Secuirty Program (Desa Mandiri Pangan) and Home-Food Gardening Program (Kawasan Rumah Pangan Lestari). 
4. Emerging Issues 
? Overweight and Obesity Trend in Adult 
Lifestyle changes increase the prevalence of obesity 
     Along with changes in lifestyle, especially inadequate consumption of vegetables and fruits; consumption of foods with high sugar, salt, and fat; and lack of physical activity; leads to the increase of obesity prevalence. Therefore, Indonesia encounters double burden malnutrition, on the one hand the Government is working to overcome under nutrition and on the other hand the problem of obesity begin to be addressed. In the adult population (over 18 years of age), the prevalence of obesity has increased from 11.7% (2010) to 20.7% in 2016 (Figure 3.18), that is higher than the target of the RPJMN 2015-2019 to be maintained at 15.4%. Similarly, the prevalence of obesity in children under five of age had reached 11.9% (2013), that decreased not significantly from 12.2% (2007). 
 

Figure 3.18.Overweight and Obesity Trendin Adults (Age> 18 Years) 
Note: * Results of Sirkesnas Interim Analysis 2016 
Source: Riskesdas  2010 and 2013, Sirkesnas 2016 
 
? Population Dynamic in Rural Areas 

Urbanization pushes productive age from rural to migrate to urban areas, 
Urbanization may influence food production capacity 
Lesson learned, among others: 
integrated approachesamong 
sectors, nutrition surveillance to support policy formulation and investment in agricultural research and development  
leading to a scarcity of productive human resources in producing food. The unproductive human resources in rural areas is among others the aging population. The 2010-2035 Indonesia population projection reported the proportion of people living in urban areas will increase from 49.8% (2010) to 66.6% (2035). Therefore, availability of human resources in rural areas for agriculture poses a heavy challenge for future food production capacity. 
5. Lessons Learned 
     Achieving the targets ofGoal 2 requires an integrated approach across sectors and among stakeholders. Management of hunger is closely linked to poverty alleviation. Improving community nutritional status is closely linked to efforts to improve theeducation level of the community. Integration of development programs and activities is vital in achieving the SDGs. 
     Program planning and implementation should be supported with accurate data and information. In the case of Indonesia, management of hunger and food insecurity is based on the Food Security and Vulnerability Atlas (FSVA). This FSVA contains information of the level of food insecurity and vulnerability up tosub-district levels, with various variables of food security including access to healthcareservices and clean water. This FSVA is very useful to focus development activities to prioritize as well as to better allocate budget tothe targetedareas. 
     Surveillance, including early monitoring, plays a great role in addressing hunger and nutrition issues. Monitoring and evaluation system on food and nutrition needs to be implemented continuously, thoroughly and periodically. The Government has developed a food and nutrition surveillance system since the 1980s, where local governments monitor continuously, to early detectfood and nutrition issues in the community. 
1) Technology Aspect. Under the scarcity of land and water resources and the competition in their utilization, along with extreme climate change, the rising food demand can only be met by increasing food productivity. Thus, technology innovation and institutionalengineering are needed. Consequently, investment in agricultural research and development needs to be prioritized. 
2) Community empowerment, including knowledge increased is one of the key factor to achieve food and nutrition development Goal. The target group of community empowerment should cover food production side namely small farmers and their families and food consumption side those are housewife and her family 
3) Regional development approach is an approach to accelerate nutrition improvement. The Interventions are designed based on local conditions that will lead to the success in addressing the local specific issues. 
4) Integrated nutrition improvement interventions need to be strengthened. Currently, interventions carried out by multisector are actually quite comprehensive but in the implementation they are working in silos. Therefore, one design or a complete intervention policy is needed that can synergize the nutrition improvement efforts carried out by all sectors.   
5) Evidence-based intervention is currently only project-based with limited scope and coverage. Therefore, the interventions that have been proven to be effective are not able to be scaled up easily and become national policies.  
 
3.4.3  Goal 3. Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 

ages are; reducing maternal and infant mortality, controlling communicable and non-communicable diseases, promoting reproductive health, improving The National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional/JKN) coverage, health personnel, medicines and vaccines. The Voluntary National Review (VNR) for Goal 3 covers the trend and analysis, challenges and improvement measures, innovation and key efforts, emerging issues and lessons learned. 
1. Trend and Analysis 
a. Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) 
     One of the main efforts put forward by the government is by ensuring that every childbirth happened at the health facility. Indonesia Demographic and 
The Maternal Mortality Rate has decreased yet strong efforts are needed to achieve the SDGs targets 
Health Survey (IDHS) shows the increase of childbirths at the health facilities from 46% (2007) to 63.20% (2012).  
	National 	Socio-Economic 	Survey 	(Survei 	Sosial 	Ekonomi 
Nasional/Susenas) shows the increases to 77.60% (2015) and 79.70% (2016). The proportion of childbirths assisted by professional health personnel based on IDHS also increased from 73% (2007) to 83% (2012). At the end of MDGs implementation (2015), the MMR has reduced from 346 (Population Cencus/SP 2010) to 305 per 100,000 live births (Intercensal Population Survey/SUPAS 2015), which constitutes 2.40% annual reduction rate (ARR). The RPJMN target of 306 per 100,000 live births in 2019 has been achieved. However, MMR global target of less than 70 per 100,000 live births in 2030 can only be achieved with ARR of 9.50%. Therefore, new commitments and breakthroughs are needed.  
\0xEF 	 
Efforts taken to ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all 
 
 
Figure 3.19.Trend of Indonesia Maternal Mortality Rate Source: Various publications 
 
     
IMR, U5MR and NMR have 
decreased but stagnant since 2007 
The trend of complete basic immunization coverage of children at the age of 12-23 months continue increasing 
     The Study of Maternal Mortality Verbal Analysis (Ministry of Health, 2012) reveals that the main causes of the maternal mortality are still dominated by hypertension in pregnancy, hemorrhage infection and other accompanying diseases (heart and kidney). Other factors that also affect were maternal health condition before pregnancy, access to and quality of health services, as well as the socio-cultural factors. Most of deaths basically could be prevented among others through the improvement of the Family Planning Program and the reduction of early marriage. 
b. Mortality Rate of Infant, Under-five and Neonatal  
     The Infants Mortality Rate (IMR) and Under-five Mortality Rate (U5MR) continue to decrease but been stagnant since 2007. The Neonatal Mortality Rate (NMR) is also stagnant during the same period. The 0.50% ARR of NMR causes the difficulty to achieve the SDGs target of 12 per 1,000 live births in 2030. It requires ARR of 3.00% to achieve such target.  Cause of deaths based on the Sample Registration System (SRS) of 2014 (which was carried out in 128 districts) are low birth weight (38.80%), asphyxia (26.50%) and congenital malformation (12.70%). The highest infant and neonatal mortality rates are at the low-income group, 52 and 29 per 1,000 live births respectively. 
                  Figure 3.20. Trend of IMR, U5MR and NMR in Indonesia Source: IDHS, BPS-Statistics Indonesia 
 
c.  Complete Basic Immunization 
     The data of IDHS and Basic Health Research (Riskesdas) shows that the complete basic immunization coverage3is continuously increasing. However, there are disparities in the coverage between region, economic status and domicile. The highest coverage is in Yogyakarta Province (83.10%) and the lowest is in Papua Province (29.20%). Meanwhile, the coverage in urban 
     
(64.50%) is higher than rural (53.70%). Based on economic status, the coverage of the wealthiest group (67.80%) is higher then the poorest group (39.50%).  

Figure 3.21. Trend of Complete Basic Immunization 
Source: IDHS (2002-2012), Riskesdas (2007-2013) 
 

     However, there are still 32.10% of children at the age of 12-23 months who obtained incomplete immunization and 8.70% who did not obtain immunization at all. Based on region, the percentage of 
Percentage of complete basic immunization of the poorest group is lower compared to the wealthiest group 
The HIV 
prevalence is 
controled below 0.5% and ARV treatment has increased 
unimmunized/unvaccinated children is highest in Papua Province (36.60%) and lowest in Yogyakarta Province (1.10%), while the percentage of children with incomplete immunization is highest in Maluku Province (48.60%) and lowest in Yogyakarta Province (15.70%). Based on economic status, the percentage of children with incomplete immunization (39.70%) and unimmunized/unvaccinated (20.80%) at the poorest group is higher compared to the wealthiest group (27.90% and 4.30% respectively). The percentage of children at the age of 12-23 months who lived in rural and obtained incomplete immunization (34.70%) and never obtained immunization (11.70%) is also higher compared to children in urban areas (29.60% and 5.80% respectively). The data of the Ministry of Health presents that districts/municipalities that achieved 80% of complete basic immunization are also increasing from 71.20% in 2013 to 80.70% in 2016. 
d. Trend of Communicable Diseases 
1) HIV-AIDS 
     The trend of HIV/AIDS cases has increased yet it is still below 0.50%. The prevalence of HIV reaches 0.37% in 2016. Meanwhile, the AIDS case rate is at 28.45/100,000 population in 2016, varies from the lowest in West Sulawesi Province (0.09/100,000 population) and the highest in Papua Province (416.91/100,000 population). However, AIDS cases have already reached the household level where the AIDS cases at present infant. Therefore, the government commits to control the HIV prevalence below 0.50% among others through the sustainable comprehensive services at the districts/municipalities to provide HIV/AIDS service to the community, as well as the Prevention Mother to Child Transmission (PMTCT) program. The AIDS case fatality rate (CFR) decreased from 13.55% (2005) to 1.11% (2016). The number of people living 
     
The TB prevalence has decreased yet strong efforts to achieve the target are needed 
The malaria morbidity rate has declined and the specific strategies based on the regional endemicity stratification being implemented 
The total number of districts/ municipalities with leprosy and filariasis elimination has increased 
with HIV and AIDS who received the Antiretroviral (ARV) treatment has increased from 2,381 (2005) to 77,748 (2016).  
 

Figure 3.22. Total HIV-AIDS cases in Indonesia, 2005-2016 
Source: Disease Prevention and Control Surveillance Report, Directorate General of Disease Prevention and Control, Ministry of Health *Latest update: 31 December 2016 
 
2) Tuberculosis (TB) 
     Based on TB prevalence survey, the prevalence of TB with the microscopic method has decreased from 331 (2006) to 263 (2015) and 257 per 100,000 population (2016). Government will continue efforts to reduce TB prevalence and achieve the RPJMN target of 245 per 100,000 population in 2019.  
3) Malaria 
     Based on the Annual Paracite Incidence (API), malaria morbidity rate has decreased from 1.75 (2011) to 0.85 per 1,000 population (2015). In 2016, there were 247 districts/municipalities that have received the malaria elimination certificate and in the phase of free malaria transmission. These districts/municipalities have implemented specific strategies based on the regional endemicity stratification, namely: (1) acceleration strategy in the East Indonesia region focusing on medical treatment at all health facilities, active case finding and the use of long lasting insecticidal nets (LLIN); (2) intensification strategy in the focus area outside East Indonesia region by emphasizing on the risk groups; and (3) elimination strategy in areas with API<1 per 1,000 population (low endemic) focusing on surveillance and early detection, as well as active case finding. 
4) NeglectedTropicalDiseases (NTDs) 
     The number of provinces with leprosy elimination has increased from 20 provinces (2014) to 23 provinces (2016) as the result of strong leprosy controlling effort. The government aims to achieve leprosy elimination in all provinces in 2019. Meanwhile, the mass drug prophylaxis against filariasis was carried out in several regencies since 2002. The achievement of mass drug 
The NCDs (Hypertension, DM, obesity) prevalence has increased 
The NCDs risk factors among others smoking behavior, alcohol consumption, lack of physical activities, and unbalanced diet have increased 
TFR has been stagnant for the last decade 
prophylaxis against filariasis during the period of 2006-2012 is less than 50% and has increased to 71.40% in 2016. The total number of districts/municipalities with filariasis elimination has increased from 8 in 2014 to 17 in 2015 and 22 in 2016. The government has a committment to eliminate filariasis in 2020 by continuously increasing the mass drug prophylaxis against filariasisat districts/municipalities with Filariasis endemic. In addition, the government has targeted to eradicate Schistosomiasis in 2019. 
e. Non-Communicable Diseases (NCDs) 
     The prevalence of hypertension is 25.8% (nearly 40 million population of 18 years of age and above) and the prevalence of diabetes mellitus (DM) is 6.90% based on Riskesdas of 2013. Meanwhile, the obesity prevalence in 2013 is 15.40% (around 23.5 million population) which is increasing from 10.3% in 2007. The NCDs affect all group of population however the poorest group has higher prevalence and it increased more rapidly. The stroke prevalence at the poorest group increased from 7.70 (2007) to 13.10 (2013) and it is the highest compared to other groups. Therefore, preventing and overcoming NCDs needs to be a pro-poor policy. 
     Smoking, aside from unbalanced diet and lack of physical activities, contributes to the increase of NCDs prevalence in Indonesia. Riskesdas shows that the proportion of population of 15 years of age and above who are smoking and chewing tobacco has increased from 34.20% (2007) to 36.30% (2013). Around 26.10% of the population lack of physical activities and 93.50% of the population of 10 years of age and above lack of consuming fruits and vegetables (2013). Meanwhile, Riskesdas 2007 shows that 4.60% of the population consumes alcohol, whereas 0.60 % consumes up to the hazardous level according to the WHO standard. Global School Health Survey (GSHS) suggests that 4.40% of children at the secondary level consume alcohol. The issue of alcohol consumption should also obtain more attention in the future. 
f. Reproductive Health 

Figure 3.23. Total Fertility Rate in Indonesia, 1981-2012 Source: IDHS 2012 
 
     The total fertility rate (TFR) has been stagnant for the last decade, at around 2.60 children per 1,000 women. Strong efforts are needed to achieve the RPJMN target of 2.3 children per 1,000 women in 2019. Meanwhile, the age specific fertility rate (ASFR) of women at the age of 15-19 years has decreased from 51 (2007) to 48 births per 1,000 women (2012). However, ASFR is still 
The total number of population covered by JKN continues to increase 
The expansion of JKN coverage contributes to the decrease of the unmet need of health service 
high compared to the RPJMN target around 38 births per 1,000 women in 2019. Higher ASFR lead to higher risk of maternal mortality and stunted children. Therefore, comprehensive reproductive health services for adolescent, including education, information, and communication (EIC), as well as increasing the age of first marriage are needed. 
     The improvement of reproductive health services contributed to an increase in contraceptive prevalence rate (CPR) of all methods from 61.40% in 2007 to 61.90% in 2012 (IDHS). Furthermore, based on Susenas, the CPR decreases from 61.98% to 59.98% during 2013-2015. The use of short-term contraceptive method is still dominant, where the drop out rate is still quite high. This condition contributes to the stagnancy of TFR for the last 10 years. 
 
	65	60.3	61.4	61.9
57.4
	5560 ill 49.7	-\0xEF54.7:.::=--ill\0xF4---::-:!~::::;-~\0x2211 ===\0x2211ill :57.4.\0x2211 =====ill \0x2211 57.9: 
56.7
5054.7
52.1
45
47.1
40
35
30 --- Any Method - Modern Method	 
	1991	1994	1997	2002/03	2007	2012
Figure 3.24. Trend of the Contraceptive Prevalence Rate (CPR) Source: IDHS 
 
g. National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional/JKN) Coverage 
     To provide health services to all citizens, the total number of population covered by JKN continues to increase. Up to 31 December 2016 there were 171.9 million participants (66.50%). The JKN target in 2019 is 95% of the total population. Partnership with health facilities has increased to provide a more comprehensive health services, shown by the increased of the first level health facility from 18,644 (January 2015) to 20,708 (December 2016) and the advanced level health facility from 1,727 to 2,068. Nevertheless, the implementation of the universal health coverage (UHC) needs to be directed to address the equity of health services between region, including access to facility and health personnel as well as the improvement of quality health facilities.  
     The expansion of JKN coverage contributes to the decrease of the unmet need of health service which is the percentage of the population with health complaints that disrupted their daily activities but do not seek treatment. The unmet need of health service decreased from 9.9% in 2006 to 4.3% in 2016.  The unmet need of health service in rural is slightly higher compared to urban due to the difference in the availability of facilities and health personnel. 
 

Figure 3.25.Percentage of Unmet Need of Health Service, 2006-2016 
Source: Susenas, BPS-Statistics Indonesia 
 
h. Health Personnel 
The availability of health personnel at health facilities has increased yet the distribution remains challenging 
     The total number of community health centers (Pusat Kesehatan Masyarakat/Puskesmas) with minimum five types of health personnel, namely:  public health staff, environmental health staff, nutritionist, pharmacist, and health analyst, has increased yet still below annual target (2015 and 2016). 
 
Type of Health Staff 
National Rate 
Lowest Rate 
Highest Rate 
Doctor 
45 
10 (West Sulawesi) 
170 (DKI Jakarta) 
Specialist 
13.6 
2.8 (NTT) 
70.6 (DKI Jakarta) 
Nurse 
170 
38 (East Java) 
453(Aceh) 
Midwife 	 
162 
47 (North Kalimantan) 
501 (Aceh) 

Source: Ministry of Health 
 
By the end of 2016, there are only 1,264 Puskesmas which met the standard of health personnel. The availability of doctors and specialists at hospitals has also shown an improvement. Utilization of health personnel at health facilities has also increase over the years. However, the Ministry of Health in 2015 reported that the distribution of health personnel in Java Island is the largest (46.76%), followed by Sumatera (26.30%), Sulawesi (9.41%), Kalimantan (7.79%), Bali and Nusa Tenggara (5.96%), and Maluku and Papua (3.78%). 
i. Medicine and Vaccine 
The availability of medicines and vaccines at Puskesmas has increased, including the drug supervision 
     The percentage of medicines and vaccines availability at the Puskesmas has increased from 75.50% (2014) to 79.4% (2015) and 81.57% (2016). To ensure the availability of medicines and vaccines, government is optimizing spending through state budget as well as utilizating the Special Allocation Fund (Dana Alokasi Khusus/DAK) that increased by 20% in 2016. Additionally, drug supervision has increased to guarantee the quality and safety of medicines. By 
Table 3.4.  Ratio of Health Personnel per 100,000 Population in 2016 
     
the end of 2016, the percentage of medicines that met the requirements has reached around 98.55%. 
2. Challenges and Improvement Measures 
The challenges for health development include improvement of knowledge and awareness, quality of health services, facilities and personnel, as well as data and information and regulation 
     The challenges and improvement measures for Goal 3: Ensure Healthy Lives and Promote Well-being for All at All Ages including maternal mortality rate, mortality rate of infant input under-five and neonatal, communicable disease, non-communicable disease, reproductive health, national health insurance coverage, heath personal and medine and vaccines, as well as data and information are follows:   
a. Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) 
1) Improvement of knowledge of pregnant woman on the importance of pregnancy examination and delivery assistance at health facilities; 2) Improvement of quality maternal services, including human resources competency, health facility, and hospital with comprehensive emergency obstretic and neonatal care (PONEK); 3) Improvement of quality maternal health services referral system; 4) Formulation of regulations that support the optimizing of maternal health services; and 5) Improvement of reproductive health education, information, and communication (EIC) as well as the services for women and girls. 
b. Mortality Rate of Infant, Under-five and Neonatal 
1) Improvement of knowledge on parenting; 2) Improvement of the quality of child health services, including human resources competency, health facility with basic emergency obstretic and neonatal care (PONED), and hospital with PONEK; 3) Improvement of the quality of health services, to prevent perinatal and neonatal deaths; 4) Improvement of the role of integrated service post (Posyandu) role; and 5) Improvement of health promotion and education, particularly on immunization and its benefit to community. 
c. Communicable Diseases 
1) Expansion of compulsory screening for pregnant woman to detect HIV/AIDS; 2) Expansion of the TB molecular rapid test at all hospitals to enhance the finding of new TB cases; 3) Improvement of systematical approach to prevent Multi Drug Resistance (MDR), including to seek the new medical treatment; and 4) Improvement of logistics, human resources and financing for HIV/AIDS (ARV, reagent and diagnostic kit) and TB along with the expansion of screening at pregnant woman and use of TB molecular rapid test. 
d. Non-Communicable Diseases 
1) Outreach to 2/3 of NCDs patients who do not know that they suffer from NCDs including the standardization of medical treatment; 2) Promotive and preventive approaches in controlling the NCDs risk factors; and 3) Improvement of human resources quantity and quality, as well as the health service infrastructures in line with the increase of NCDs patients. 
e. Reproductive Health 
1) Improvement of gross enrollment rate for women (12 yearsi compulsory education) to prevent early marriage; 2) Improvement of the use of long-term contraception method; and 3) Improvement of reproductive health education, particularly for school-age children.  
 
f. National Health Insurance (JKN) Coverage 
1) Expanding the JKN coverage of informal and formal workers; 2) Expansion of partnership between Social Security Administrative Body for health (Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Sosial Kesehatan/BPJS) and private first level health facilities; and 3) Improvement of access to quality health facilities and personnel. 
g. Health Personnel 
1) Improvement of quality health personnel through the competency test and accreditation of health education; 2) Improvement of the engagement of health professional organizations and education institution associations to enhance health personnel competency and professionalism; 3) Development of the health personnel placement scheme, particularly for the underdeveloped, border and island areas. 
h. Medicines and Vaccines 
1) Improvement of self-sufficiency in the production of drug raw materials; 2) Improvement of the rational drug use; and 3) Strengthening drug supervision to prevent the circulation of false drugs and vaccines. 
i. Data and Information 
The improvement of the quality of health data and information, particularly the development of birth and mortality data collection system for monitoring and evaluation achievement of health development, including data collection for narcotic, phsycotropica and addictive substance and traffic accidents. 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts 

1) 
Several efforts to reduce MMR and IMR, including: 1) Service Delivery Insurance (Jaminan Persalinan/Jampersal), which is a 
The innovations to reduce MMR and IMR are Jampersal program, blood transfusion unit and planned generation  
The innovations for 
communicable diseases are HIV/AIDS screening, ARV treatment and TB diagnostic using molecular rapid test  
2) 
program commenced since 2011 to provide free service to pregnant woman from poor families. Along with the implementation of JKN, the scope of Jampersal has been adjusted to cover cost for shelter, operational cost, health personnel, and transportation costs; 2) Strengthening the blood transfusion unit at sub-national level, including the improvement of quality technical staff, as well as the infrastructures; and 3) Planned Generation (Generasi Berencana/Genre) is the program to reduce ASFR through the reproductive health education for teenagers in the preparation of family life. 
Communicable diseases: 1) HIV/AIDS screening for pregnant woman and ARV treatment for key population, pregnant woman, TB and hepatitis patients with HIV positive; and 2) Improvement TB diagnostic using molecular rapic test. 

3) 
Non-communicable diseases, namely: the enactment of Presidential Instruction (Inpres) No. 1 of 2017 concerning Healthy Lifestyle Community Movement (Gerakan Masyarakat Hidup Sehat/Germas), 
The innovation for 
NCDs is through 
Germas 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 
which is a cross-sector movement to improve healthy lifestyle of the community supported by the availability of infrastructures as well as improvement of healthy environment. One example is the regional based integrated elderly care post for NCDs (Pos Pembinaan Terpadu/Posbindu), schools and work places, as well as the implementation of free smoking areas (Kawasan Tanpa Rokok/KTR) through the sub-national regulation. 
Integration of maternal and child health indicators, communicable diseases (HIV/AIDS and TB), and non-communicable diseases (hypertension, DM and mental disruption) into the Minimum Service Standard in health sector. 
National Health Insurance (JKN), namely: 1) the enactment of Law Number 40 of 2004 concerning National Social Security System (Sistem Jaminan Sosial Nasional/SJSN) as a basis of JKN; 2) Increase of total number of health facilities in partnership with BPJS-Health; 3) Simplify the premium payment mechanism through thousands of outlets and online system; and 4) application of the performance based capitation to encourage the preventive and promotive health efforts. 
Health personnel: 1) mandatory work for specialists (Wajib Kerja Dokter Spesialis/WKDS), specialist education program (Program Pendidikan Dokter Spesialis/PPDS), special assignment of team based (Nusantara Sehat) and individual based health personnel to fulfill the need of health personnel particularly for the underdeveloped, border and island areas; 2) health personnel registration system as a control system for professional practices and the record of health personnel distribution, conducted by three independent institutions, namely the Indonesian Health Personnel Council (Majelis Tenaga Kesehatan Indonesia/MTKI), Indonesian Medical Doctor Council (Konsil Kedokteran Indonesia) and the National Pharmacy Council (Konsil Farmasi Nasional); 3) the establishment of Independence Accreditation Agency for Health Higher Education 
(Lembaga Akreditasi Mandiri Pendidikan Tinggi Kesehatan/LAM PTKes), which accredits all health science study programs intended to improve the quality of health education institutions. 
Medicines and vaccines: 1) application of the e-catalogue to guarantee transparency in the procurement of drugs and health equipments; and 2) formation of vaccine research consortiumaiming at producing new vaccines in accordance with Indonesia diseases characteristics such as TB and Dengue. 
Develop the integrated referral system and telemedicine to reduce the number of referrals and to fulfill specialist services which are not available in some areas.  
Application of the sample registration system (SRS) for recording the deaths and the causes of deaths as basis to develop National Civil 
Registration and Vital Statistic (CRVS), as well as the application of 
     
Emerging issues for the health are the increase risk factors of noncommunicable diseases and the use of rational drugs 
CRVS in several districts/municipalities (Solo, Pekalongan, Gorontalo, and Yogyakarta). 
10) The family oriented approach health service, which is the health services by Puskesmas that integrates the individual and community health efforts with the family as the target. The health service is provided by visiting families in the work area of the Puskesmas. 
4. Emerging Issues 
     Emerging issues on goal 3: ensure healthy live and promote well-being for all of all ages related to increase risk factors of the non-communicable disease and use operational drugs are follows:  
a. Increase Risk Factors of the Non-Communicable Disease  
    Due to rapid urbanization of population to large cities, there is a tendency of increasing unhealthy lifestyle, such as lack of physical activities, unbalanced diet and smoking behavior. These conditions contribute to the increase of prevalence of hypertension, high blood glucose, high blood fat, as well as obesity, which increases the prevalence of heart and vascular disease, chronic obstructive lung disease, and various types of cancer which are the main causes of deaths (WHO, 2013). The poor group will face the risk of catastrophic spending for NCDs and decrease in productivity, which ultimately worsen theirpoor condition. 
    Indonesia is also experiencing the escalation of NCDs. The Riskesdas shows the increase of stroke prevalence from 8.3 per mil in 2007 to 12.1 per mil in 2013. In addition, 61% of the total deaths were caused by cardiovascular, cancer, diabetes and chronic obstructive lung disease. There is also high prevalence of infants with low birth weight (10%) and short-born (20%), as well as the high stunting at under-five (37.2%) in Indonesia (2013). They need to obtain more attention due to the potential of increase risk factor ofNCDs at the adulthood. The financial burden of the government and community will increase due to the increase of NCDs. Therefore, controlling the NCDs risk factors should be given more attention from the government in the future. 
b. Rational Use of Drugs 
    The increase of access and availability of medicine in the community poses the challenge of rational use of drugs. According to WHO, the use of drugs is rational when the patient receives medications in accordance with their clinical needs, during an adequate period and at lowest cost to them and their community. However, the requirements for rational use drugs are often not adhered to. Drugs are prescribed and provided incorrectly, ineffectively and inefficiently coupled with the problem of obtaining essential drugs. Based on 2016 National Health Indicators Survey (Survei Indikator Kesehatan Nasional/Sirkesnas), the rational use of drugs at the Puskesmas is only 64.4%. Therefore, rational use of drugs should become the focus intervention to prevent the inappropriate drugs that may jeopardize patients and result in increased antibiotic resistance (Anti-Microbial Resistance). The efforts to increase the community trust toward the quality health services, is also needed. 
 	 
Learning for the health development includes JKN as the health service reformation and need of cross-sector approach  

5. Lessons Learned 
In implementing goal 2, Indonesia learned a number of lessons as follows: 
 
a. JKN as a Reform in the Health Service System 
     The JKN is the form of government responsibility in providing health service to the community to reduce the financial constrains of the population to access health services, shown by the decrease of unmet need of health services. With the principle of \0xECno one left behind, everyone is required to have health insurance, where the premium of the poor is borned by the government. Due to JKN, there is an increase in motivation to improve the quality and the provision of comprehensive health services to the community. In addition, JKN is an opportunity for the government to use the state health budget more effectively and efficiently. The government has more flexibility to allocate budget for community health, such as for promotive and preventive efforts. b. Cross Sectoral Approach 
     The efforts to improve the community health need a cross-sectoral approach. Typically, the health development closely related to the intervention only dealt by health sector. However, the experience of the Government of Indonesia in controlling various community health problems (i.e. NTDs, NCDs risk factors), showed that the engagement of other sectors has very important roles. For instances, basic infrastructure development such as water and sanitation sectors dealt by the public works, and environmental management (contamination control and waste management) dealt by environmental sector, provided significant contribution in determining the success of the health development. Therefore, the cross-sectoral role is strongly needed for the health development in the future. 
 
3.4.4 Goal 5. Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
     Gender equality and women empowerment achievements are not only related to Goal 5 of SDGs, but are also related to the measurement of other goals that have specific targets on gender issues. However, not all gender related indicators at the SDGs are able to be reported this year. The report presents goals, targets and indicators of which data and information are already available, including discrimination against women, child age marriage, equal opportunity for women at all decision-making levels, universal access to sexual and reproductive health, as well as the use of technology to enhance women empowerment. This report was formulated by involving all stakeholders namely government, civil society organizations, philanthropy and business, as well as academician and experts. It covers trend and analysis, challenges and improvement measures, innovation and key efforts, emerging issues, and lessons learned. 
     
1. Trend and Analysis 
a. Ending All Forms of Discrimination Against Women 
Indonesia has Target to end all forms of discrimination against women among others is regulations to 
attain gender measured by the increased of total laws/policies on gender equality and women equality empowerment.  Pancasila, as the State Ideology (particularly the principle of \0xECJust and Civilized Humanity), assures equal right and non-discriminative treatment for men and women. In addition, the Indonesiais 1945 Constitution (Articles 27, 28, and 31), as the Fundamental commandment and Constitutional Basis provides legal certainty to fair and equal treatment. Indonesia has also ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), which is translated into Law Number 7 of 1984 on 
ratification of convention for elimination of all forms of discrimination against women. Indonesia has committed to eliminate all forms of discrimination against women in various attempts and to improve sustainable gender equity and equality. 
     Moreover, after the declaration of Beijing Platform for Action (1995) on the strategy for women empowerment and gender equality in development, Indonesia issued the Presidential Instruction (Inpres) Number 9 Year 2000 on Gender Mainstreaming (Pengarusutamaan Gender/PUG) in national development. This legal basis instructs all ministries/institutions and local governments to implement gender mainstreaming. 
     There are other important policies/laws related to the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women in Indonesia, among others: 
1) Law Number 39 Year 1999 on human rights. 
2) Law Number 23 Year 2004 on elimination of domestic violence. This law is one of the legal instruments to eliminate discrimination against women within marriage and household. 
3) Law Number 12 Year 2006 on nationality. 
4) Law Number 21 Year 2007 on eradication of human trafficking crime. This law is one of state commitments to eliminate the discrimination against women in the context of human trafficking crime.  
5) Law Number 2 Year 2008 on political party. 
6) Law Number 42 Year 2008 on general election.   
7) Law Number 36 Year 2009 on health. The article 136 and 137 on reproductive health regulates governmentis responsibility to provide reproductive health information, education and service to adolescenes. 
8) Law Number 8 Year 2012 on general election, which guarantees the engagement of women in the General Election and regulate the requirement of minimum 30% women representation. 
9) Law Number 6 Year 2014 on Village. This law regulates the participation of citizens (including women) in the planning process, implementation and monitoring of the village development. 
10) Law Number 13 Year 2014, as revision of Law Number 23 Year 2002 on Child Protection. 
 
     
Violence against women occurs more in rural area, physical violence is most carried out by the spouse, and sexual violence is most carried out by non-spouse 
 
The proportion of women who ever married before the age of 15 years and 18 years tends to decline, which indicates the 
b. Elimination of all forms of violence against women  
     The accomplishment of eliminating all forms of violence against women is among others shown by the decrease of prevalence of violence against women and girls by spouse or non-spouse. The National Womenis Life Experience Survey (Survei Pengalaman Hidup Perempuan Nasional/SPHPN) of 2016 presents the magnitude of problems of violence against women as follows: 
1) Violence by spouse and non-spouse; 1 of 3 women at the age of 15-64 years old experienced it during their lifetime (33.4%) and around 1 of 10 women experienced it in the last 12 months (9.4%). Women live in urban experience more violence compared to women live in rural areas. 
2) Violence by spouse; around 2 of 11 women who were ever married/are married experienced physical and/or sexual violence by the spouse during their lifetime (18.3%) and around 1 of 20 women experienced it in the last 12 months (4.9%). Physical violence is the type of violence that occurred the most. 
3) Violence by non-spouse; around 1 of 4 women experienced physical and/or sexual violence by non-spouse during their lifetime (23.7%) and around 1 of 18 women experienced it in the last 12 months (5.6%). Sexual violence is the type of violence that occurred the most. 
The attempts to eliminate violence against women are as follows:  
\0xEF The establishment of National Commission on Violance Against Women, based on Presidential Decree Number 181/1998 as amended with Presidential Decree Number 65 and 66 Year 2005.  This Commission is 1 of 3 national human rights institutions. The other two are National Commition on Human Rights and Indonesian Commission for Child Protection (Komisi Perlindungan Anak Indonesia/KPAI).  
\0xEF Campaign on 16 Days of Activism Against Gender Violence as part of international campaign to promote elimination violance againts women around the world. 
c. Elimination of all harmful practices against Women and Girls 
     The progress in this matter is shown by: (1) Decrease of child marriages; (2) Increase of the median age at first marriage of women; (3) Decrease of birth rate at teenagers; and (4) Increase of Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) at the Senior High School level and the equivalent eduation program (Angka Partisipasi Kasar-APK SMA/SMK/MA/sederajat (of male and female). The analysis of each indicator is as follows: 
1) Child Age Marriage 
     Figure 3.26 shows that the proportions of women at 20-24 years of age who were married for the first time or living together without marriage before the age of 15 years and before the age of 18 years, tend to decline. 
decrease of harmful practice against women and girls 
 
The median age at first marriage at women in urban is higher than rural. This has a positive relation with education level. 
 

Figure 3.26. Percentage of women at 20-24 years of age were married for the first time or living together without married before the age of 15 years and 
 before the age of 18 years Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia  
 
     There is early marriage practice in Indonesia. However the percentage of women at 20-24 years of age who were married for the first time before the age of 15 years or 18 years declined for the period of 2011-2015. The percentage of women at 20-24 years of age who were married for the first time before the age of 15 years is less than 1% in 2015. However the percentage of women at 20-24 years of age who were married for the first time before the age of 18 years is still around 12%. Elimination of early marriage is important to reduce the risk of womenis health, triggering sexual violance, and human right violation as well as increasing fertility rate. 
2) Median age at first marriage of women at the age of 25-49 years who ever married. 
     The decrease of marriage prevalence at child age has an impact on the increase of the median age at first marriage. Figure 3.27 and Table 3.5 show the median age at first marriage of women at the age of 25-49 years who ever married, increase from 17.1 years old in 1991 to 20.1 years old in 2012. The comparison between IDHS in 1997 and 2012 shows that women have been postponing the first marriage for one and a half year since 1997. The increase of the median age at first marriage is higher for women living in rural (1.1 year) compared to women living in urban areas (0.8 year). However, in general women at the age of 25-49 years and living in urban married two years later compared to women living in rural areas (21.5 years compared to 19.1 years). 
 
     

Figure 3.27.  Trend of median age at first marriage of women at the age of 25-
49 years who ever married, 1991-2012 
Source: Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey (IDHS) 
 
     There is positive relation between median age at first marriage and education level. On the contrary, there is a negative relation between median age at first marriage and economic level. Women at the wealthiest group have been married later compared to women at the poorest group. The median age at first marriage of women at the age of 25-49 years in the wealthiest group is 22.6 years old and in the poorest groupis 19.1 years old (IDHS, 2012). The higher the median age at first marriage shows that a woman is physically and emotionally ready to become a mother. In Indonesia, marriage has close relationship with fertility, since normally most of the women give birth right after their marriage. 
 
Table 3.5. Median age at first marriage of women at the age of 25-49 years who ever married 
  
IDHS 1997 
IDHS 2012 
Volatility 1997 n 2015 
Total  
18.6 
20.1 
1.5 
Urban  
20.4 
21.2 
0.8 
Rural  
17.9 
19.0 
1.1 
 
3) Age Specific Fertility Rate (ASFR) of women at the age of 15-19 years 
     The decrease of child age marriage prevalence and the increase of median age at first marriage of women have caused the decrease of ASFR of women at the age of 15-19 years, as shown in Figure 3.28. 
 
     
The decrease of the child age marriage prevalence and increase of the median age at first marriage reduce ASFR, particularly in rural areas 
The increase of 
GER/APK at the Senior High School level and the equivalent eduation program shows the increase of gender equality in the education sector  
Figure 3.28. Trend of ASFR at the age of 15-19 years per 1,000 births 
Source: IDHS 
 
     The declining of ASFR occured in rural area (Table 3.28). However, the ASFR at the age of 15-19 years of women live in rural is still two times higher compared to women live in urban areas. This is due to the median age at first marriage in rural, which is still around 19 years, while it already reached 21.2 years in urban areas (IDHS 2012). This rate shows that the culture and education level in rural communities in understanding the importance of postponing the child age marriage is not as well as it is in urban areas. 
 
Table 3.6. Age-Specific Fertility Rates by Area 
 
IDHS 1997 
IDHS 2012 
Differentiation 
Urban 
32 
32 
0 
Rural 
79 
69 
-10 
Total 
62 
48 
-14 
 
 
4) Gross Enrollment Rate (GER) at the Senior High School level and equivalent education program 
     The education data shows that the equality between male and female at the secondary school level has been achieved (Figure 3.29). This achievement occurred since 2011, in which the GER/APK ratio of female to that of male at Senior High School level and the equivalent eduation program is around 100. This means that the participation of female is equal to male. The gender equality in education has a role in increasing the women age at first marriage. The 2012 IDHS showed that there is a positive relation between education level and women age at first marriage. 
 
The trend of women representation at DPR increased, which indicate the increase of the womenis role in politics 
Figure 3.29. GER/APK at the Senior High School level and the equivalent education program by Sex, 2006-2016 
Remarks: * The figures in 2006 only cover the formal education Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, Susenas 2006-2016 
 
d. Equal Opportunity for Women at All DecisionMaking Levels 
     The formulation of regulations to eliminate discrimination against women has opened opportunities for women to participate as decision makers. The gender equality program has resulted in the progress of full and effective women participation in several sectors, which are: (1) Increase of women participation in national parliament and in several regions; and (2) Increase of women proportion in managerial position. The analysis of each indicator is as follows: 
1) Proportion of Seats Held by Women in National Parliament 
     The proportion of seats held by women in House of Representatives (Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat/DPR) at the national level has an increasing trend, yet fluctuative (Figure 3.30). The representation of women at DPR in the 2004 general election was 11.84% and increased to 17.86% in 2009. However, it decreased slightly to 17.32% in the 2014 general election. 
 

Figure 3.30. Percentage of Women DPR Members in 1950-2014 General Election 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2015 
     

     
e. Universal Access to Sexual and Reproductive Health 
     In line with the Program of Action of ICPD (the International Conference on Population and Development; the Beijing Platform for Action) and program to control population growth, Indonesia has undertaken some efforts to decrease the Unmet Need of Family Planning and to improve the understanding on contraceptive method, not only at Productive Age Couple (Pasangan Usia Subur/PUS) but also through sex education for the young generation. 

Figure 3.33.Trend of Unmet Need in Indonesia 
Source: IDHS 1991 n 2012 
 
Knowledge and Understanding of PUS on Modern Contraceptive Method  
Figure 3.34 shows the knowledge on contraceptive method of all married 
Knowledge and understanding of PUS on modern contraceptive methods has improved 
women at age of 15-49 years and married men at age of 15-54 years. Nearly all married women and men in Indonesia (99% and 97%) have heard and known at least one family planning method. Almost all respondents who have known at least one family planning method, also have known about the modern family planning method. The knowledge of PUS about traditional and modern contraceptive methods is important. The modern contraceptive method is the most successful and effective method in the family planning program. 
     Injection and pills are the most known contraceptive methods by women in Indonesia (96%). The modern contraceptive methods that are least known by the respondents are the emergency contraceptive, diaphragm and Method of Amenorrhea Lactation (MAL). In general, menis knowledge about contraceptive methods is less then womenis, except about condoms. Womenis 
Unmet need of 	1) Unmet Need of Family Planning  
Family Planning has declined yet still The Unmet Need indicates the demand of contraceptive methods that are above the universal unfulfilled. There are many reasons for PUS to avoid using contraceptive target methods, among others lack of knowledge, rejection of use from couples, concerns related to side effects and lack of comfort, cost concern, distances to service facilities, and below optimum service quality. Unmet need declines from 17.00% in 1991 to 13.10% in 2007 and 11.40% in 2012. However, this rate is still above the universal coverage target (0%). 
 

know of at least 7 contraceptive methods, while men know less than 6 contraceptive methods. 
 
 
Figure 3.34. Knowledge of PUS on Contraseptive Methods Source: IDHS 2007 n 2012 
 
Indonesia has regulations on reproductive health that stipulates the responsibility of government to 
     To improve womenis knowledge on reproductive health, Law Number 36 Year 2009, particularly Article 136 and 137, regulates the responsibility of government to provide information, education and services to adolescent as long as they are not in contradiction with the moral and religious norms. Further specific policy can be found in Government Regulation Number 61 Year 2014 
3) Laws or Government Regulations to Guarantee Women at the Age of 15-49 Years to Obtain Services, Information and Education on Sexual and Reproductive Health 
     
provide information, on Reproductive Health. This Government Regulation stipulates that each education and woman has the right to obtain maternal health services in order to achieve a services healthy life and to be able to give birth to healthy and qualified generation as well as to reduce the maternal mortality. The services cover (i) Adolescent Reproductive Health Service; (ii) Antenatal Care (ANC), Pregnancy, Delivery, and Postpartum; (iii) Family Planing, contraceptive service and sexual health; (iv) Reproductive System Health Service. 
     Furthermore, Article 20 to 22 of Law Number 52 Year 2009 on population development and family development states that government manages Family Planning Program to improve access to and quality of information, education, counseling and service of Family Planning and Reproductive Health. In Article 23, Government and Local Government have obligation to improve access to and quality of education information, counseling, and contraceptive services. 
 	 
     
Proportion of women who own a mobile telephone is less than men 
Challenges to achieve gender equality include violence against women and girls, child age marriage, Unmet Needof Family Planning, and women 
representive in legislative and executive institutions 
 
f. Increase the Use of Technology, Particularly the Information and 
Communication Technology to Improve Womenis Empowerment 1) Proportion of Individuals Who Own a Mobile Telephone 
     The advancement of information and communication technology has given convenience and opened opportunity for everybody. This has also enabled women to be more empowered by giving them access to knowledge for eduction, carreer improvement, and entrepreneurship opportunity while still undertaking their domestic role, as well as enable them to interact with a wider community. 
     The Susenas shows that the proportion of women who own mobile telephone is less than men. However, there is an increased of proportion of individuals (women and men) who own mobile telephone for the last two years. In 2015 the percentage of women who own mobile telephone is 50.40% and this number increased to 52.10% in 2016. At the same period the proportion of men who own mobile telephone is 63.40% and this number increased to 64.40% (see Annex 1 n Table 3). There are some challenges for women to access information technology including mobile telephone such as cost, literacy and language capacity, as well as womenis role in decision making within household4. 
2. Challenges and Improvement Measures 
a. Violence against women and girls is still high and violence victims who obtain comprehensive service are still limited. Therefore, there are several actions to be taken: (a) enhance the efforts to prevent violence against women; (b) determine the legal basis for minimum service standard for violence victims; (c) improve the availability of services for violence victims, who are living far from the service units (such as mobile service units, community based services, free online complaints service, etc.); (d) improve capacity and quality service of Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (Pusat Pelayanan Terpadu Pemberdayaan Perempuan dan Anak/P2TP2A) or similar institutions by strengthening cross-sectoral coordination; (e) improve Education, Information and Communication to enhance violence victim to report voluntary; and (f) develop the complaint service mechanism that is accessible by victims. 
b. Child marriage is still high, and in order to reduce its percentage does not only depend on GER but also requires the synergic intervention from other related sectors, such as overcoming poverty and harmonization of legislations related to child issues i.e: Marriage Law, General Election Law, and Population Law as well as Child Protection Law, and revision of Marriage Law to increase first age of marriage.  
from Puskesmas; (c) improve postpartum Family Planning services; (d) improve the EIC as well as comprehensive and sustainable Family Planning counseling. 
d. Women representative in legislative and executive institutions is still low. Therefore, some actions need to be taken: (a) capacity building for women cadres in political parties; (b) capacity building for potential religious leaders and community leaders; (c) capacity building for women candidate for head of region; and (d) capacity building for elected women legislative members and head of region.  
e. The data and information system on violence against women is not developed yet. Valid data on the magnitude of violence against women problems at the province/district/municipality level, on harmful practices against women, and that integrates intercentral-regional level and interinstitutions are not available. Therefore, some actions need to be taken: (a) carry out the SPHPN periodically and continuously, by expanding coverage up to province and district/municipalities levels; (b) develop integrated data and information system on violence against women; and (c) utilize data and information on violence against women for improvement of policies and victim services. 
 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts 
a. Innovation on Tools to Implement Gender Mainstreaming Strategy 
c. The Unmet Need of Family Planning is still high. Therefore, several efforts need to be undertaken: (a) study on unmet need group and their reasons for not using contraceptive so that appropriate intervention can be put in place; (b) expand mobile services to reach PUS who are living far Innovations in gender equality includes provision of GAP, ARG and 
provision of data on 
violance against women 
b. 
through Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting: 
     The development of the gender analysis instrument, namely Gender Analysis Pathway (GAP) was conducted in 1998 by Bappenas in cooperation with the State Ministry of Womenis Empowerment and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA). The GAP is the gender analysis instrument for planners to analyze and formulate for development policies/programs/activities to be gender responsive. 
     In 2007, to accelerate the implementation of gender mainstreaming, an initiative emerged that suggests the integration of gender perspective not only into the planning system but also into the budgeting system. This was followed by the development of gender responsive budgeting instrument by Ministry of Finances, called the Gender Budget Statement (GBS) or later called Gender Responsive Budget Sheet (Anggaran Responsif Gender/ARG Sheet). This acceleration program of Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting (Perencanaan dan Penganggaran 
Responsif Gender/PPRG) was officially made as policy in the RPJMN 2010-2014. 
 
 
Innovation on Data Provision of Prevalence of Violence Against Women 
     The SPHPN, which was conducted in 2016, is a special survey on violence against women. The idea behind carrying out this survey is lack of information on the scale of violence against women problems in Indonesia and the unavailability of valid data on violence against women cases for policies and programs formulation. The SPHPN was conducted 
     
through cooperation among Bappenas, MOWECP, and BPS-Statistics Indonesia, with technical assistance from UNFPA and funded by state budget.  
     This is the first survey in Indonesia to collect information on violence experienced by women at the age of 15-64 years who are currently married/ever married and who are not married, either experienced during the last 12 months or during their lifetime. This survey adopts the WHO questionnaire, namely \0xECWomenis Health and Life Experiences, which was especially designed to explore information on violence against women. The types of violence covered in the SPHPN are classified based on violence perpetrators, namely spouse and non-spouse. Type of violence by spouse includes physical, sexual, emotional, economic violence as well as physical limitation. Meanwhile, type of violence by non-spouse includes physical and sexual violence.  
     The SPHPN is carried out at the national level covering samples of 9,000 households. The process of interview with selected respondents follows the code of ethics, privacy and security of the respondents. The interviewers were women who were selected and trained on gender and violence materials, interview materials and method for sensitive issues, ethics and interview safety. The level of response at this survey is 97.3 % (8,757 households). 

4. 
Emerging Issues 

a. 
Human Trafficking Crime (Tindak Pidana Perdagangan Orang/TPPO). 
A new modus of TPPO emerged by using working visa as well as umrah 
Emerging issues in the improvement of gender equality include human trafficking crime, violence against women and girls, women exploitation, child age marriage, and sexual and reproductive health services 
b. 
c. 
d. 
e. 
f. 
5. 
and hajj visa. 
Violence against women and girls by non-spouse through internet media. The less discreet utilization of the communication technology, such as internet, mobile phone, computer, etc, has impacts on the increase of crime/violence against women and girls. 
Exploitation of women for the interest of terrorism and crime perpetrator syndicate. Terrorism and criminal cases already emerged at present using women or girls. 
Child age marriage. This issue has already been proven as having substantial negative impacts for the future of women. The increase of school participation by girls until the secondary education level is insufficient to significantly reduce the child aged marriage. 
Harmful practices for women and girls. The magnitude of this issue is not known due to the unavailability of valid and adequate data. 
Less adequate sexual and reproductive health services. This includes mental counseling related to the reproductive health (pre-menstruation syndrome/PMS, baby blues, too early initial menstruation, etc.). 
 
Lessons Learned  
     Lessons learned for the implementation of gender equity and gender equality are obtained from the partnership between the government and society organizations. The following boxes are the samples of these lesson learned: 
 
Box 2. Improvement of Women Access to Reproductive 
Health Services and Reproductive Rights n The 
Cooperation between Local Government and Community Organizations 
     Aisyiyah has made the efforts to improve the access of women to the screening service to prevent cervical cancer and breast cancer as well as the access to Family Planning. From 2014 to the beginning of 2017, Aisyiyah was succeeded to encourage 7,271 women to examine Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid (Inspeksi Visual dengan Asam Asetat/IVA), 1,271 women to carry out Pap Smear and 1,638 women to take clinical breast examination (Periksa Payudara Klinis/Sadarnis) in 14 districts and 5 provinces. To enhance access for early detection service, Aisyiyah made several efforts to overcome the service financial burden by advocating the coverage of Social Security Administrative Body at subnational level, allocating in the Local Government Budget, advocating in Villages Budget, synergizing with private sector, as well as raising fund through Gerakan Infaq Sayang Ibu (GISI) in cooperation with Lembaga Zakat Infaq Shodaqah Muhammadiyah (LazisMu) or Badan Amil Zakat Nasional (Baznas). 
     To increase access of reproductive health service, Aisyiyah has encouraged the district governments to issue Circular Letter on IVA and Sadarnis services at Health Facility-I. Such Circular Letterswere issued by the District of Takalar, Health Office of Pangkep District, and Health Office of Blitar. In addition, there is a policy to simplify the administrative process for poor women to examine IVA and Sadarnis for free. 
     To improve the knowledge and understanding of PUS on modern contraceptive methods and to reduce the unmet need, Aisyiyah has made efforts to enhance the access of women to obtain Family Planning information and service. Aisyiyah has provided education and socialization on contraceptive methods at community level through various Aisyiyah community religious activities conducted by their cadres,  Early Childhood Education teachers, Integrated Services Post community, or neighbourhood community. Aisyiyah had also cooperated with BKKBN at district level, health personnel and polyclinics owned by Muhammadiyah to fulfil the need of contraceptive, which are often not available. This has reached a lot of women to be able to access the Family Planning services that suitable with their physical condition. By implementing these interactive and communicative methods, Aisyiyah was succeeded toreach 119,031 PUS in 2016, so that PUS in 6 districts and 2 provinces (North Sumatera and South Sulawesi), obtained comprehensive information on Family Planning. 
Lessons learned to improve gender equality includes among others cooperation of the 
Local Government and society organizations in the improvement of reproductive health and reproductive rights 
 
 
 
 
Box 3. Women Development Planning Meeting at 
District Level (Musyawarah Perencanaan 
Pembangunan/Musrenbang) n  in East Lombok and North Lombok, West Nusa Tenggara, 2016 
 
     The Women Musrenbang is one of the initiative activities for implementing Presidential Instruction Number 9 Year 2000 on Gender Mainstreaming in National Development. In general, the Women Musrenbang in Indonesia is not popular and only a few local governments have commitment to organize it. The District Governments of East Lombok and North Lombok in West Nusa Tenggara Province are pioneers of the Women Musrenbang. The Women Musrenbang is intended to complete the regular musrenbang, which is not yet optimal in accommodating the interest of women, so that it obstructs the achievement of gender equality. 
     The success of Women Musrenbang are among others affected by: (1) the openness of Head of District and Deputy of Head of District as well as commitment/strong willingness of Sub-National Government Agencies (Regional Development Planning Agency, Women Empowerment and Child Protection Office, including Community Empowerment Board and Village Government) in both districts; and (2) the existence of non formal education called \0xECSekolah Perempuan, that established at villages by Institute for Human Resource Improvement (Lembaga Peningkatan Sumber Daya Manusia/LPSDM) and KAPAL Perempuan Institute. 
     These Women Musrenbang in East Lombok and North Lombok have succeeded to: (a) encourage the increase of poor women and marginal groups participation to be engaged in the development planning process; (b) ensure that issues of women and marginal groups are included in the planning and budgeting of the government; (c) prepare the women representative as team delegator at regular Musrenbang to oversee that their proposals are included in the planning and budgeting documents. Women Musrenbang has contributed to implement the pro-poor and gender responsive planning and budgeting, and do enhance the participation of groups that are all this time left behind in the development (realize the \0xECNo one left behindand particularly \0xECNo woman left behind). 
     The Women Musrenbang was carried out since 2016 in the North Lombok District. These are the programand budget allocation as resulted of Women Musrenbang: 
a. The Local Government replicated the \0xECSekolah Perempuan in 2017. This is a model for women empowerment in gender equality. 
b. The \0xECSekolah Perempuan program has already been integrated within 20162021RPJMD. This program covers 33 villages. 
The Women 
Musrenbang in West Nusa Tenggara is one of the initiative activities for 
implementing 
Presidential 
Instruction Number 9 
Year 2000 on Gender 
Mainstreaming in 
National Development 
  
 
c. The Local Government prioritized the prevention and termination of child marriage by intervening the customary law or Awig-Awigin Bayan Village, Bayan District. 
d. The Women and Child Musrenbang is carried out in 2017 for the teenage group and youth group (youth and university student). 
     The Women Musrenbang in East Lombok District was commenced in 2014 and has the outputs as follows: 
a. The Local Government allocated for the Women Musrenbang budget around IDR 12 million in 2016 and IDR 25.4 million in 2017, covering 20 districts. 
b. The Women Empowerment and Child Protection Office allocated around IDR 54.9 million for the women political education to increase women participation in politics. 
c. Bappeda cooperated with LPSDM andMitra Samyato formulate the Women Musrenbang Module.  
d. The Local Government prioritized the prevention and termination of child marriage by intervening the customary law or Awig-Awig in Montong 
	Betok Village, Montong Gading District. 	 
 
Box 4.  \0xECWorld Without Violence in Our Village n A 
Documentation of the Community Efforts to End Violence 
Against Women and Children in Papua 
     \0xECWe are strongly longing for a more peaceful life was revealed by men and women in Benyom. They agreed to create a more peaceful village without violence, particularly against women and children. They also agreed to establish the Kingan Working Group (in the local language Kingan means Beautiful Woman) in Benyom Village, Nimboran, Jayapura, Papua, in December 2013. Working Group of Homi Inae (Peaceful Home) or K310 was established in Sentani City Village, Sentani, Jayapura in the same period. \0xECWe must all participate including head of village, religious leaders and community leaders, so there is no violence in our village said a man in Benyom. 
     The Working Group members started their action by raising of community awareness on the problem of violence against women and childrenthrought lobbying the religious leaders (church reverend). The religious leaders give messages about violence against women and children during the church mass or meetings at the church, for example action taken by Working Group of Kingari, Sogokmo and Kurulu. Meanwhile, Working Group of K310 tried to prepare materials on violence against women and children for holy book class teaching. The Working Groups shared theiractivities and contact numbers to village people. 
The Working Group particularly for handling violence against women and children has been established at the 
village level in 
Papua Province 
 
 
1\0x2211 	The Working Group members in Arso Kota, assisted by Yayasan i Teratai Hati Papua, explored the local wisdom to respects women rights. They also encouraged the formulation of the draft village regulation on alcohol consumption because alcohol consumption and poverty contributed to the occurrence of violence against women and children. 
     The K310 was involved on handling 4 cases of violence against women and children, while Kingari was involved on handling 2 cases of violence against women. The challenges faced by Working Group in assisting victims are the recognition of the Working Group in community and the coordination with the police and Puskesmas. Nevertheless, the Working Group members are enthusiastic and motivated to conduct wider socialization by engaging men. They also involved youth to participate in the violence against women elimination movement through village discussions, as were carried out in Benyom, Arso, Sentani City, Sogokmo and Kurulu. 
     Fonce Ohree (42 years, woman survivor) said that the information from Working Group made her aware that women should have the courage to speak up and have the right to speak. \0xECThere are legal rules to protect women, she said. The awareness of men also emerged in Benyom to take care of the children. \0xECSince the existence of this activity and after I told my husband, my husband becomes more patient and is willing to assist in arranging domestic work, said a pioneer woman in Benyom. A husband in Arso City said \0xECOur relationship becomes more comfortable. There are always efforts to avoid violence. 
     Those are stories of learning on ending violence against women and children in Papua taken by the government of Papua and supported by UNFPA, UNWOMEN and UNICEF at 3 districts in Papua (Jayapura, Keerom and Jayawijaya). 
	I 	I  
 
3.4.5 Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation 
     Goal 9 is carried out through: (i) development of qualified, resilient and environment-friendly infrastructures to be accessed by public; (ii) inclusive industrialization, including small-scale industries, and expansion of their access to financial resources and ability to be a part of the value chain, as well as promoting application of technology and innovation that support sustainable industrialization. 
Infrastructure development 
improves access to 	1. Trend and Analysis 
goods that 
a. Develop Quality, Reliable, Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure 
contributes to the 
economic growth and Indonesiais infrastructure quality score is 4.2 which is below the average reducing poverty and score of ASEAN countries of 4.4. The logistic cost in Indonesia reaches 26% of inequality 	rd among 160 
GDP, and its Logistic Performance Index (LPI) ranked 63
countries. Table 3.7 shows that Indonesiais score tends to decrease among the ASEAN countries. Reduction of logistic cost through infrastructure development in Indonesia is important not only for sustaining economic growth but also for reducing poverty and inequality. 
 
     
National steady roads increased from 82.27% in 2010 to 
94% in 2014 
Table 3.7.  Logistic Performance Index 
Country 

Year 



2007 
2010 
2012 
2014 
2016 
Singapore 
4.19 
4.09 
4.13 
4.00 
4.14 
Malaysia 
3.48 
3.44 
3.49 
3.59 
3.43 
Thailand 
3.31 
3.29 
3.18 
3.43 
3.26 
Indonesia 
3.01 
2.76 
2.94 
3.08 
2.98 
Vietnam 
2.89 
2.96 
3.00 
3.15 
2.98 
Philippines 
2.69 
3.14 
3.02 
3.00 
2.86 
Cambodia 
2.50 
2.37 
2.56 
2.74 
2.80 
Myanmar 
1.86 
2.33 
2.37 
2.25 
2.46 
Laos 
2.25 
2.46 
3.50 
2.39 
2.07 
Source: World Bank (various years) 
     Acceleration of infrastructure development is important to reduce development gap among regions in Indonesia, particularly between the Western and Eastern part. Infrastructure development is prioritized to increase the national connectivity, that can improve economic efficiency and flow of goods and services across regions. This will increase affordability and accessibility of low income and remote households to their basic needs.  
     Road quality is continuously improved, reflected by the increasing length of national steady roads. In 2010, national steady roads reached 82.27% of the 38,564 km total national roads. Although the total length of national roads only increased slightly to 38,569 km in 2014, the total steady road increased to 94%, close to the 2019 target of 98%. 


4,736.11

3,538.97

2,719.38

2,335.26


6,838.26








	31,726.46	33,833.72	35,030.77	35,850.44	36,234.47
	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014
\0xEF Steady \0xEF Non-Steady
Figure 3.35.  Progress of National Steady Road (km) 
Source: Public Works and Public Housing Statistics Information Book, Ministry of Public 
Works and Public Housing (2015) 
 

Figure 3.36. Percentage of National Steady Road 
Source: Public Works and Public Housing Statistics Information Book, Ministry of Public 
Works and Public Housing (2015) 
There were 33 toll road segments of 949 km operating in Sumatera, Java, Bali and Sulawesi in 2014 
The railways development and rehabilitation was increased by 95% in 2011-2015 
     The toll road development, which is the main support to peopleis mobility and inter-area logistic movement, is the priority among other national roads. It will reduce the logistic costs and trigger new industrial areas, which create employment and new growth centers. There were 33 toll road segments located in four big islands: Sumatera, Java, Bali, and Sulawesi with the total length of 949 km in 2014. 905.15 km in the process of signing under the Toll Road Undertaking Agreement (PPJT), 40.57 km is in the tender process and 233.84 km is in the tender preparation (see Statistical Annex Table 4). 
     Trans Java toll road development has supported growth of Kendal Industrial Zone of 2,700 ha, in cooperation with Singapore, and it will create 500 thousand jobs. Furthermore, it will provide additional opportunities to workers on increasing income and reducing poverty. The remaining 66 km of Trans Java Toll Road will soon be connected and encourage the development of industrial areas outside of greater Jakarta. 
 

Figure 3.37. Length of Railway Development (km) 
Source: Transportation Information Book, Ministry of Transportation (2015) 
 
     Beside roads, Railways is expected to be the backbone of people mobility to reduce congestion and road traffic. Improvement of railways are undertaken by developing double track railways of 727 km, which will be completed by 2019. The double track railways that has been completed are Solo-Kutoarjo and Yogyakarta-Kutoarjo with the length of 65 km each. The double track railways that will be completed soon are Kroya-Kutoarjo (76 km), Solo Kedung-Banteng (50 km), Kedung Banteng-Madiun (50 km), Madiun-Jombang (90 km), and Jombang-Surabaya (40 km). While the double track railways development in Sumatera are Medan-Bandar Kalipah double track fly over and reactivation of the Binjai-Besitang (80 km). This railways reactivation is carried out in order to prepare the Trans Sumatera Railroad, which to be completed in 2021. The quality improvement and railways rehabilitation during 2011 to 2015 was increased by 95%, from 1,834 - 3,567 km. Most of Indonesia railways are operating in Java and Sumatera, whereas in 2019 additional railways will be available in Sulawesi and Kalimantan.   
     Beside physical improvement, information technology (IT) modernization in railways has also been implemented impressively. Some examples of IT improvement for railways services are ticket vending machine as well as online ticket transactions through websites and minimarkets. This improvement has increased service quality, convenience, and certainty of railways transportation which is as good as the air transportation services.  
Airport development is needed to reduce isolation of remote areas 
There were 244 ports developed in 20112014 
     As the largest archipelagic country, Indonesia is also focus on improvement of air and sea transportation not only to improve the domestic and international people mobility but also to reduce isolation of the remote areas. There were 305 airports in 2015, consisting of 10 primary airports, 17 secondary collector airports, 39 tertiary airports, 173 feeder airports, and 66 airports that are not yet classified (see Statistical Annex Table 5).   
     As a country with more than 17 thousand islands, and 70% of the teritory is sea areas, makes sea infrastructure extremely vital for the inter-island movement of people and goods. Low transportation cost will reduce price discrepancy among islands and lowering inflation, which erodes purchasing power. 
 

Figure 3.38. Development of Total Ports (2011-2014) 
Source: Transportation Information Book, Ministry of Transportation (2015) 
 
     Port development is vital to support embarking/disembarking of passengers and loading/unloading of goods in a significant manner. The Government of Indonesia has launched Sea Toll Program as the main program of 2014-2019 to facillitate flow of goods from the West to East regularly. There were 1,739 ports available to support Sea Toll program in 2014, in increased of 244 ports since 2011.Beside seaport development, Indonesia also repaired big ship to support Sea Toll Program such as Caraka Jaya Niaga III-4, Caraka Jaya Niaga III-22 and Caraka Jaya Niaga III-32 motorship in 2015. They are operated to serve 3 determined sea toll routes. 
 

Figure 3.39. Development of Total Passengers Based on Transportation 
Mode 2010n 2016 (Million Person) 
Source: Socio-Economic Data Monthly Report, BPS-Statistics Indonesia (various years) 
 
Total passengers of all modes transportation increasedue to infrastructure development 
Infrastructures acceleration promote industrial development and improve flow of logistic  
Acceleration of infrastructure developement declined the price of goods by 20-25 % 
Industrial sector was growth slightly decreased from 4.33% in 2015 to 
4.29% in 2016  
     Improvement various transportation infrastructures has significant impact of passengers to use the public transportation. Train passengers increase most significantly, followed by the domestic air transportation passengers and international air transportation passengers. The smallest number of passengers is sea transportation passenger, however it has increased annualy. In 2010-2016, the number of sea transportation passengers increased double. 
     Infrastructure development is not only to support effectiveness and efficiency of passengers and goods mobility, but it also becomes the basis for industry development. There are 14 industrial areas being developed in Easten Indonesia which could potentially create 962,000 employments. Three industrial areas were already operating until 2016: Sei Mangkei, Morowali and Bantaeng. The development of other industrial areas is accelerated to next three years. 
     Infrastructure development and logistic improvement have shown significant achievement. Logistic cost per container was able to be reduced of USD 200/container. Additional of international shipping routes decreased time to export from Eastern Indonesia, for example time to export to China was reduced from 24 to 16 days; to Japan from 28 to 18 days; and to Korea from 27 to 17 days. Focus to develop infrastructure in Eastern Indonesia has indicated positive impact, in the first-time economic growth of Eastern Part of Indonesia higher than the Western, reached 6.05%. Morever, it is reported that price of goods has decline 20-25% in Eastern Part of Indonesia. 
b. Promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization 
     Industrial sector is the largest contributor for GDP, followed by agricultural sector. Industrial growth decreased from 4.33% in 2015 to 4.29% in 2016. Most of other sectors have higher growth than industrial sector, causing decreasing of the contribution of industrial sector to GDP decreased from 22.04 % in 2010 to 21.72 % in 2013 and further decreased to 21.39 % in 2016. 
 

Figure 3.40. Manufacturing Industry Value Added Growth Rate (%) 2011-
2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017 
 
 
Agro-based industry absorp 60 % of total industrial workers  
Manufacturing Value Added as a 
Proportion of GDP (%), 2010-2016 

22.04

22.06

21.97

21.72

21.65

21.54

21.39
	2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
\0xEF Manufacturing Industry
\0xEF Oil and Gas Manufacturing Industry
\0xEF Non Oil and Gas Manufacturing Industry
Manufacturing Value Added as a 
Proportion of Per Capita(million Rupiah), 2010-2016





2010	2011	2012	2013	2014	2015	2016
Figure 3.41. Manufacturing Value Added as a Proportion of GDP (%) dan per Capita (Million Rupiah) 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017 
 
     The global crisis declining global demand and it has impacts to the lowering investment at several industries, such as the steel basic metal industry, bamboo, wood and rattan industry, fat and oil industry, machine industry, textile industry, oil refinery industry, and rubber goods industry. Those industries have high investment multiplier, consequently sluggish of those investments has large impacts on the overall economic performance. 
 

Figure 3.42. Manufacturing Employment as a Proportion of Total Employment 
(%) 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017  
 
     Manufacturing industry is able to absorb more than 12 % of total employment. From 2010 until 2012, share of manufacturing industry workers increased significantly, however after 2012 it showed slight declining trend. Share of agro based industry workers, which is almost 60 % of total workers in the industrial sector in 2013 to 2016, indicates that developing agro based industrial sector may create employment opportunities. 
     Contribution of industrial sector to GDP has declined, however industrial value added per capita increased (Figure 3.41). Industrial value added per capita was Rp 6.34 million in 2010 and keep increasing to Rp 9.84 million in 2016. This indicator is one of the indicators used by UNIDO to see the inter-country comparison of Competitiveness Industrial Performance (CIP). According to the CIP index of 2013, Indonesia is 42nd rank (score of 0.087), which is categorized as upper middle quintile. 
 
     
Table 3.8. Absorption of Agro Based Industry Workers (%) 
Year 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Food Industries 
18.01 
16.94 
13.95 
Beverage Industries 
1.03 
1.02 
0.90 
Tobacco Industries 
7.25 
6.87 
6.42 
Textile Industries 
9.55 
10.56 
10.52 
Wearing Apparel Industries 
11.42 
12.29 
11.53 
 Leather, Related Products and Footwear Industries 
5.33 
5.39 
6.30 
Wood and Wood Products Industries 
4.59 
4.40 
3.80 
Paper and Paper Products Industries 
2.72 
3.49 
3.78 
Total 
59.91 
60.96 
57.19 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, various years 
 
     Industrial development objective is to strenghten industrial structure and increase value added of (semi) raw materials. One of the policies that has been implemented was the prohibition of raw minerals export, in order to promote smelter industry such as in Sulawesi, Kalimantan or Java. Smelter industry increases value added local raw materials to encourage export-oriented processing and also create employments. Utilizing local resources and creating jobs increase local economic livelihood and reduce poverty. Smelter of 2,000 ha in industrial area is being developed in Sulawesi, several companies has operated in early phase since 2016 and create 13 thousand jobs. 
     Strengthening industrial structure and creating raw material value added by applying industrial technology inovation need to be improved.  Innovation and technology adaption is one of challenges for future industry. The survey result of Agency for Assessment and Application Technology (BPPT) (2011) on manufacturing industry showed that 58% of technology industry is obtained from abroad and only around 31% is obtained in country. 
 
Table 3.9. Ranking of Innovation 
Country 


Innovation 



2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Singapore 
8 
8 
9 
9 
9 
9 
Malaysia 
24 
25 
25 
21 
20 
22 
Indonesia 
36 
39 
33 
31 
30 
31 
Thailand 
54 
68 
66 
67 
57 
47 
Philippine 
108 
94 
69 
52 
48 
62 
Vietnam 
66 
81 
76 
87 
73 
73 
Cambodia 
85 
67 
91 
116 
122 
118 
Source: Global Competitiveness Report WEF, various editions 
 
     The majority of technologies come from Japan, China, Germany and Taiwan. In order to increase domestic technology utilization, Government of Indonesia has increased special budget for research to create innovation and encourage downstream research, the research that is able to create economic 

opportunity. Industrial sector priorities in inovation to create high product efficiency, improvement of products, use of sustainable energy and efficiency, as well as improvement on waste management. 
     One of innovations applied in infrastructure development is industrial port estate development, The Lamong Bayterminal (Terminal Teluk Lamong/TTL) 
Lamong Bay Terminal is an advance innovative infrastructure development which adopt enviromental friendly principle  
developmentas the first green port in Indonesiawas launched in 2015 by President Joko Widodo. The TTL uses the Go Green concept by using compressed natural gas and minimizing emission of overall business processes. The TTL operation uses information technology with online platform, paperless and quick response, which increase productivity and efficiency. The TTL development based on three pillars of sustainability, covering the economic pillar (growth, cost underemployment, and revenue), social aspect (charitable contribution, fair trade and employee welfare), and environmental aspect (resources consumption, land use, waste management). The innovation that has been carried out by PT Terminal Teluk Lamong (founder of Teluk Lamong Terminal), has recognized by the Governor of East Java in 2015 as the Consistent Environmental Management Reporting Industry. Indonesia ranks as the 3rd of inovative countries in ASEAN above Thailand and the Philippines, while below Singapore and Malaysia. 
 
c. Significantly Increase Access to Information and Communication 
The growth rate of industrial sector is not as high as other sectors.  
Access to information Financial and insurance servicesand information and communication have the and communication first and second highest growth rate. Information and communication sector is highly increase  due to the communication age, where information is easily accessed by the community and has become a basic need. 
     The drastic change of information and communication technology indicated by the shift of landline phone to celuller phone, and even the use of internet through celuller phone has penetrated down to rural areas. Telecommunication has eliminated the limits of distance and reduced the differences between communities in urban and rural areas. The time difference, distance of location and heterogeneity of people are no more the obstacles in the speed of disseminating information. 
     According to Internet World Statistic, Indonesia was the eighth largest internet using countries of the world in 2015. Based on Figure 3.43, the 
Access of internet 
doubled in 2015-2016  percentage of population aged 5 years and over who access the internet was only 
11.09 % in 2015, but increased to 25.37 % in 2016 doubled in one year. In 2014, 361 districts/municipalities (72%) were covered by municipalities fiber optic network mostly in Western part of Indonesia. It is targeted that in 2019 to reach 100 % of the universal service obligation (USO) area. 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.10. GDP Growth Rate based on Constant Price by Industrial Origin 2011-2016 
Industrial Origin (Serial 2010) 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
A. Agriculture, Forestry and Fishery 
3.95 
4.59 
4.2 
4.24 
3.77 
3.25 
B. Mining and Quarrying 
4.29 
3.02 
2.53 
0.43 
-3.42 
1.06 
C. Manufacturing Industry 
6.26 
5.62 
4.37 
4.64 
4.33 
4.29 
D. Electricity and Gas Supply 
5.69 
10.06 
5.23 
5.90 
0.90 
5.39 
E. Water, Sewage, Waste and Recycling 
4.73 
3.34 
3.32 
5.24 
7.07 
3.60 
F. Construction 
9.02 
6.56 
6.11 
6.97 
6.36 
5.22 
G. Trade 
9.66 
5.40 
4.81 
5.18 
2.59 
3.93 
H. Transportation and Storage 
8.31 
7.11 
6.97 
7.36 
6.68 
7.74 
I. Accomodation, Eating and Drinking 
6.86 
6.64 
6.8 
5.77 
4.31 
4.94 
J. Information and Communication 
10.02 
12.28 
10.39 
10.12 
9.69 
8.87 
K. Financial and Insurance Service 
6.97 
9.54 
8.76 
4.68 
8.59 
8.90 
L. Real Estate 
7.68 
7.41 
6.54 
5.00 
4.11 
4.3 
M. Bussiness Services 
9.24 
7.44 
7.91 
9.81 
7.69 
7.36 
N. Government, Defense and Social Security 
6.43 
2.13 
2.56 
2.38 
4.63 
3.19 
O. Education Service 
6.68 
8.22 
7.44 
5.47 
7.33 
3.84 
	P. Health Services 	9.25 	7.97 	7.96 	7.96 	6.68 	5.00 
GROSS DOMESTIC 
	6.17 	6.03 	5.56 	5.01 	4.88 	5.02 
PRODUCT 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017 
 
 

Figure 3.43. Percentage of Population aged 5 Years and Over who Access the 
Internet (Including Facebook, Twitter, BBM, Whatsapp) in the Last 3 Months 
(%) 
Source: National Socio-Economic Survey (Susenas), BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017 
     
Cellular phone users increased from 38.5 % in 2010 to 58.3 % in 2016 
      The high proportion of internet user reflects the era of open access and the acceptance towards technology development, towards information society. The rising number of internet users in Indonesia is also caused by the rapid cellular phone development. Figure 3.44 shows the percentage of population aged 5 years and over owning/using cellular phone was 38.50 % in 2010 and in increased to 58.30 % in 2016. It shows that the community access to communication increased by 50% within six years. 
 

Figure 3.44. Percentage of Population Aged 5 Years and Over 
Owning/Using Cellular Phone in the Last 3 Months (%) 
Source: National Socio-Economic Survey (Susenas), BPS-Statistics Indonesia, 2017 
Indonesia is relatively Based on data above, Indonesia has relatively reduced digital divide able to reduce digital among regions by including the telecommunication and information as priority divide to achive national connectivity. This effort includes the development of telecommunication and information infrastructure outside Java, as well as expanding fiber optic backbone network and mobile broadband throughout Indonesia, by prioritizing frontier, outermost, and disadvantages. 
 
2. Challenges and Improvement Measures 
 
     
Challenges in industrial infrastructure development and innovation are budget limitation and soft infrastructure quality, slow rate of industrial development and digital gap  
     There are several challenges in industry, infrastructure and innovation development, especially related to poverty alleviation and welfare improvement. The challenges among others are: (i) budget limitation and soft infrastructure quality; (ii) slow rate of industrial development; (iii) Digital gap. 
 	 
a. Budget Limitation and Soft Infrastructure Quality  
     Infrastructure as the prerequisite of national economic development, requires development and continous improvement to create equitable, reliable, and resilient infrastructure. Based on Global Competitiveness Report of 20162017, Indonesiais infrastructure quality has been increased from 92nd (of 110 countries) in 2012 to 60th of 138 countries) in 2016. In the development plan for 2015-2019, Government of Indonesia has prioritized infrastructure development by focusing on the infrastructure development acceleration to strengthen national connectivity, developing urban mass transportation, and improving effective and efficient financing. As Indonesia has targeted to accelerate doubled or tripled the infrastructure development, there are some challenges to be overcome, including availaibility of competent human resouces, and technology capacity. 
     
     There are some schemes to fill the gap of limited state and regional government budget (APBN/APBD) to finance infrastructure: 
1) Simplify investment procedures to attract foreign investment; 
2) Implement effective public-private partnership (PPP); 
3) Utilize new financing schemes, such as non-annual state budget investment financing (Pembiayaan Investasi Non Anggaran/PINA), Infrastructure Financing Insurance Corporation (Lembaga Penjaminan Pembiayaan Infrastruktur/LPPI) and issuance of infrastructure bond.  
     Competent human resources and technology capacity are soft infrastructure that is required to materialize acceleration of infrastructure development. Currently Indonesia has about 700,000 engineers or 2,800 engineers per million people. Compared to other countries, such as China, Korea, India and Vietnam, which has reached 11,000 engineers per million people. Furthermore, only 15% of Indonesian students choose engineering (China 38% and Korea 35%) of total study program.  
     Government of Indonesia has anticipated lack of interest of young generation to learn engineering by doing the following:  
1) Allocate significant budget to increase engineering education facilities, both in number and quality; 
2) Increase the number and improve vocational training and skills centers (Balai Latihan Kerja/BLK) quality;  
3) Coordinate research and development institutions activities to applied technology in specific sectors to accelerate infrastructure and economic development; 
4) Require all foreign contractors, consultants and supporting industries to cooperate with similar type of domestic industries and employ local engineers  
5) Simplify and harmonize certification of engineers. 
   Construction companies are encouraged to allocate CSR resources to strenghten technical education and BLK quality, provide scholarship and apprenticeship program to technical students, as well as, allocate company technical experts to periodically giving lectures to universities.   
b. Slow Rate of Industrial Development 
     The main challenge of industrial development is to accelerate industrial development in order to increase share of industrial sector to GDP and simultaneously increase share of industrial workers to total employment. There are some measures to overcome the challenge: 
1) Indonesia utilizes the benefit of demographic bonus by applying laborintensive industrialization policy. Labor-intensive policy stimulates larger absorption of workers. It may also increase product competitiveness, since labor wage in Indonesia is lower than advanced countries. The labor-intensive industrialization has not always applying low technology. Automotive industry, for example, is relatively high technology, but includes labor intensive in the manufacturing process. 
 
2) Indonesia has one of the highest biodiversity. If the biodiversity is explored and developed in proper and sustainable way, it may create significant economic impact. It can be materialized by applying local based or agrobased industrialization policy to create value added by engaging local community.  
 CPO-Based ........... 
For Non-food CPKO-Based \0xEF\0x2211\0xEF\0x2211\0xEF\0x2211\0xEF 
For Food and 
Non-Food 
Figure 3.45. Agro-based manufacturing value added 
Source: Standart Export Pricing (Harga Patokan Ekspor/HPE) April 2011, processed by the Ministry of Industry 
 
  Several areas have been developed and they need to be supported to become the center of agro industrial based in creating value added, such as: Sumatera for palm oil, rubber and sugar processing; Kalimantan for palm oil and wood materials; Sulawesi for cocoa and fishery; Bali, Papua, Maluku and Nusa Tenggara for farm and fishery based industries. Industries categorized to agro based industry are tobacco industry, paper and wood industry, and rubber industry, etc, and most of them are labor intensive industry. 
c. Digital Gap 
     Indonesia is the biggest archiphelagic country with 255 million populations that live in more than 17 thousand islands. It is a big challenge providing internet access to all of the population. This digital gap is narrowed with the development of national fiber optic network, which will reach 440 districts/municipalities throughout Indonesia, known as Palapa Ring project. It is expected that equal access of information will be enjoyed by all population. 
3. Emerging Issues  

 The 2030 Development Agenda emphazises integration of environmental 
Indonesia applies sustainable financing and starts circular economyto minimize environmental degradation 
dimension into social and economic dimension, it implies that all life elements should be considered to the environmental impact. Economic progress has cost due to environmental damage, such as water, air and soil pollution, flood and draught disasters, as well as increasing of earth temperature. The need for environmental friendly culture and behavior is also aligned with Indonesiais commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emission by 26% in 2020.  
     Industrial and infrastructure development are also required to follow environmental friendly behavior in the business processes. The new behaviour is also supported by financial sector. A strategic step has been initiated by Financial Service Authority (Otoritas Jasa Keuangan/OJK) in 2013 by the issuance of Sustainable Financial Roadmap as a new standard for financial service institution to sustainable principle, Profit-People-Planet. The policy aims to strengthen the ability of financial service institution in facing environmental 
and social risks, while simultaneously encourage to develop competency and to innovate sustainable product and sevice.  
     In Jakarta Stock Exchange, sustainable financing has been implemented through Sri Kehati Index. This stock market index refers to sustainable and responsible investment of listed companies by considering 6 main factors, such as environmental, community, corporate governance, human rights, business behavior, labor practices and decent work. Indonesia commitment to environmental dimension is also implemented by initializing circular economy, a regenerative system that minimized input and waste, emission, and energy leakage. 
4. Lessons Learned 
     Acceleration of infrastructure development increases people and goods mobility and reduces price discrepancy between Eastern and Western part of Indonesia. Infrastructure development also support Special Economy Zone and encourage industrial development. The industry is intended to have multiplier effect by developing local resource, such as: 
1) Palm Oil Downstream Product Processing: 
The Oleochemical Indonesia has been launched in Special Economic Zone of Sei Mangke in 2015. The factory employed 600 workers and 2,000 indirect workers, which includes palm oil supply farmers. It produces 165 thousand tons of crude palm kernel oil and 206 thousand tons oleochemicals products, such as fatty acid, surfactant, glycerin, as well as soap noodle, a key material to produce soap, shampoo, and detergent. 
2) Rubber Processing:  
The Multi Kusuma Cemerlang, a joint venture of domestic and foreign investor, invested Rp 500 billion rubber processing industry in Samarinda, East Kalimantan. The factory absorbs about 400 workers to process crude rubber into semi-finished materials. The rubber, which water has been separated, is a key material to produce tires or materials related to other rubber industries.  
     As a resources-rich country, including mineral resource, Indonesia has issued policies to prohibit raw or semi-raw mineral export. The policy is intended to encourage value added and create jobs. Smelter industry is one of examples intended by the policy. However, developingsmelter industry needs adequate infrastructures including significant electricity source, supporting regulations and clean-skillful bureaucracy. Various economic packages have been launched in order to support the deregulation and de-bureaucratization. Industrial development is not only need infrastructure development but also enabling environment. 
 
Box 5. Lamong Bay Green Port 
Lamong Bay Terminal (Terminal Teluk Lamong/TTL) is an icon of environmental friendly port (Green Port). The TTL is also known as the fourth of most advanced bay in the world. It integrates container depot, automated stacking crane toll road, and the automated lift On/Off System. Complete automatic operation produces high productivity, high standar of safety level, and high efficiency and accuracy.  The environmental friendly principlesare applied with:  
1) Environmental Friendly Technology 
a. Compressed Natural Gas fuel for trucks; 
b. Electrical-mechanical equipments; 
c. Possessing own gas power plant; 
d. Light Emitting Diode (LED); 
e. Solar Cell. 
2) Material Recycle  
Air conditioning system utilizing exhaust gas. 
3) Environmental Awareness 
a. Mangrove planting;  
b. No fossil energy; 
c. Environment friendly activities.  
4) Waste management system 
a. Waste treatment; 
b. Incinerator; 
c. Oil water separator; 
d. Oil spillage respond. 
	I 	-. 
	IL-	I  
 
 
3.4.6 Goal 14. Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine l!I \0xEF biodiversity as the source livelihood and for coastal community as well as to ' resources for sustainable development 
Indonesia, as the largest archipelagic country, posseses rich sea and marine 
support sustainable economic development. The conservation and sustainable use of coastal and marine resources are implemented through: marine spatial planning, sustainable management of the Fisheries Management Area (WPP), total allowable catch within biological sustainable level, combating Illegal, Unregulated, Unreported (IUU) Fishing, and improvement of the Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) as well as the improvement of small-scale fisheries financial access. 
1. Trend and Analysis 
National Marine 	a. 	Marine Spatial Planning and Fisheries Management Areas 
Spatial Plan is being 
developed to support Ocean Act 32 of 2014 becomes the basis for Indonesia marine spatial an integrated and planning. A National Marine Spatial Plan (RTRLN), to support an integrated sustainable use of and sustainable use of marine and coastal areas, have been developed through a marine and coastal systematic process including participatory, transparency and scientific-based areas approach. The Plan is currently being fomalized through a government regulation. At the provincial level, coastal zoning plan has been developed in some provinces and by 2019, all provinces are targeted to finish their plans.  
     The development of both plans intends to ensure the sustainability of marine and coastal resources management, which is carried out through: (i) improvement of marine, coastal and small islands protection; (ii) preservation of maritime socio-culture, indigenous communities and artisanal fisheries; (iii) improvement of community welfare through development of maritime economic growth centers; and (iv) ensure legal certainty to attract investments. 
                      Marine and Fisheries Affairs Ministerial Regulation No. 18/2014 has established 11 Fisheries Management Areas (Wilayah Pengelolaan Perikanan/WPP) to ensure sustainable use of fisheries resources.The WPP is an area established for fisheries management, including fish catching, fish cultivation, fishery conservation, and research and development included the Indonesia has inland water, island water, territorial sea, additional zones, and Exclusive established 11 WPP Economic Zone (Figure 3.46). Each WPP is required to develop Fisheries to ensure sustainable Management Plan. 
use of fisheries 

Figure 3.46. Map of the Fisheries Management Areas (WPP) 
Source: Regulation of the Minister of Marines and Fisheries Number: PER.47/MEN/2016 concerning Estimation of Potential, Total Allowed Catching, and Fish Resource Utilization Level in the Fishery Management Area of the Republic of Indonesia. 
 
     The Fisheries Management Plan for all WPPs has been formalized through the series of marine and fisheries affairs ministerial decrees5. Through WPP, catching areas is also to realize joint management based on common property and to develop Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM). The WPP management will give wider authority to local government by engaging local communities as well as ensuring the existing local wisdom is internalized across generations. Therefore, WPP-based management will ensure fishermen to catch fish that do not exceed its biological sustainable level that is conducted by establishing transparent and responsible licensing mechanism (responsible fisheries). 
     
Indonesia improve update data recording to increasing MSY estimation 
To combate IUU 
Fishing Indonesia has strong legal basis and developed monitoring, controlling and surveillance system, as well as strengthened interministerial coordination  
From 1990 to 2016, 
Indonesia has 
b. Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) and Combating IUU Fishing 
     Indonesia commits to improve the quality of estimating Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY).For more than two decades, Indonesia MSY stagnants at 6.4 million tons of fish. In 2011, this figure has been improved to 6.5 million tons and in 2014, after the establishment of WPPs, the MSY increased to 7.3 million tons (see Statistical Annex Table 6). Indonesia also continues to update the data recording, particularly on data recording at all fish landing points and fishing vessels and identifying new species that were not considered before.  
     Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU Fishing) is one of the problems that need high level commitment and close cooperation at the field level. Indonesia has strong legal basis to combate IUU Fishingaccording to Act No. 31/2004 jo Act No. 45/2009 regarding fisheries. To combat IUU fishing, the Government of Indonesia has developed monitoring, controlling and surveillance system; strengthened inter-ministerial coordination by carrying out sea patrols and regional cooperation with neigbouring countries; as well as increased community participation through a community-based surveillance.  
     Various sanctions are in place to push law enforcement, such as license withdrawal. With those efforts, Indonesia can maintain its national MSY, provide wider opportunity for local fishermen to access fisheries resources and improve their welfareness.  
c. Improvement of the Marine Protected Area (MPA) and its Sustainable 
Use  
declared 17.9 million The ratio of MPAs against Indonesia total territorial waters keeps increasing 
     From 1990 to 2016, Indonesia has declared 17.9 million hectaresi marine conservation areas consisting of 165 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). By 2020, the Government of Indonesia targets to establish 20 million hectares of MPAs. 
     
hectaresi MPAand develop a tool to optimize 
effectiveness of the 
MPA management 
from 0.14% in 1990 to 5.31% in 2016. Indonesia also develops a tool, namely Management Effectiveness for Marine Protected Area (E-MPA) to evaluate the effectiveness of the MPA management. It provides overview of the status of MPAs management. The tool is also used to evaluate and award the work of local MPA managers. 
 
	13.56	13.95	15.41	15.78	15.76	16.45	17.30	17.90
9.62
	4.17	4.29	4.74	4.86	4.85	5.06	5.13	5.31
19900.14-I20082.96. I2009. I2010. I2011. 2012I 2013I 2014I 2015I 2016I 
	\0xEF MPAs Areas (ha, billion) \0xEF Percentage (%)	 
Figure 3.47. Extent of MPAs and its ratio toward the total territorial waters Source: Ministry of Marine and Fisheries Affairs, 2017 
 
Indonesia keeps protecting small scale fisheries to improve the welfare of small scale fishermen 
The challenges in the conservation and ensuring sustainable use of marine and 
fisheries resources are 
optimizing MPA effectiveness, combating IUU 
fishing, financing assistance to smallscale fishermen   
     Those initiatives are carried out to maintain conservation areas for nursery and spawning ground to ensure the sustainable use of fisheries resources by the local community. Other benefits can be as marine tourism, limited cultivation, education and research and development.  All activities in MPA by local and indigenous communities, and private sectors are regulated by a permit issuance. The issuance of permit will ensure the activities will not exceed the MPAis carrying capacity and in accordance to Indonesiais Guidelines of the Sustainable Fisheries Zoning Utilization in the Conservation Area. 
d.  Protection of Small Scale Fisheries 
     Indonesia keeps protecting small scale fisheries. The government Act No. 7/2016 regarding Protection and Empowerment of Fishermen, Fish and Salt Farmers, provides support for fishermen, fish and salt farmers in the form of: means and infrastructures for doing sustainable business, capacity building, institutional arrangement, financing system, risks transfer, and legal assistance. 
     The Access to Financing for Small Scale Fishermen is continuously improved. Micro credit for fishery sector has been increased with an average of 10% annually during 2012-2016. Number of micro credit recipients also increased in average 158% annually from 6,644 recipients (2012) to 48,513 recipients (2016). 
 
Figure 3.48. Access to funding for small scale fishermen 
Source: Ministry of Marine and Fisheries, 2016  
2. Challenges and Improvement Measures 
     There are some challenges in the conservation and ensuring sustainable use of marine and fisheries resources: 
a) The effective MPAs management requires clear institutional arrangement and improved infrastructures.  
b) Combating IUU fishing has lowered the potential of fishery production in some areas. This situation provides opportunity for local fishermen to optimize those potentials. However, they still need supports in the form of means and infrastructures and capacity building.  
c) Any financing assistance to small-scale fishermen needs to take into account impacts to sustainability of marine and coastal ecosystem, including fisheries resources. To ensure that, proper regulations are required to be in place.  
 
The innovations and key efforts are qualified stock assessment, vessels information system, technical regulations, establishment of zoning plan and subnational government 
participation to the expansion of MPAs 
Several local wisdoms are effective in conserving marine ecosystem and ensuring sustainable use of fisheries resources 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts  
     Various innovations and key efforts that have been in place are, among others: 
a) The stock assessment at WPPs, vessels licensing governance, as well as the application of other regulations on capture fisheries, haverecovered fish resources (SDI). Future efforts are to focus on strengthening WPP management through the institutionalization of the WPP. 
b) The establishment of vessels information system has improved law enforcement at sea, including vessel licensing, illegal vessels, illegal trading, and human traficking.  
c) Zoning system is established to increase the effectivenss of MPAs management and providing opportunity for local fishermen to sustainably use fisheries resources.  
d) The active participation from sub-national government has contributed positively to the expansion of MPAs. 
e) As mandated by Act No.7/2016, Government of Indonesia provided partial contribution to insurance premium for fishermen since 2016. This contribution will provide risk protection from disasters and accidents.  
4. Emerging Issues 
     The amendment of Act No. 23/2014 concerning Local Government implied shift of authority in marine and fisheries sector from district/city to provincial level. This will impact the management of marine and fisheries areas. 
5. Lessons Learned 
     The management of marine and fisheries resources in Indonesia has recognized various local wisdom which in line with the sustainable use of natural resources. Local wisdom is defined as community rules/traditions inherited from generation to generation recognized as customary law that appliedto the coastal community. Such local wisdoms are effective in conserving marine ecosystem and ensuring sustainable use of fisheries resources. Several examples of local wisdom are: Sea Customary Law/Tradition (Nangroe Aceh Darusalam), Ponggawa Sawi tradition (South Sulawesi), Awig-awig tradition (West Nusa Tenggara), Pamali Mamancing Ikang (North Maluku), and Sasi Customary Law/tradition (Maluku).  

Box 6. Kolono Bay Care Forum Ensures the Marine 
Ecosystem Sustainability 
     One example of effective engagement and participation of the local government, society organizations, coastal communities and small scale fishermen at the local level is the implementation of the Fishery Area Access Management Program (PAAP) in Kolono Bay, South Konawe Regency, Southeast Sulawesi Province. This effort was initiated by Marine and Fisheries Office of South Konawe Regency and supported by Rare Indonesia. 
     The principle of PAAP is to change management pattern in marine areas as an approach to prevent fish stock depletion due to overfishing. It works by providing rights or permits to certain group of fishermen that have the capacity to protect, manage and utilize the fisheries areas sustainably. Specifically, PAAP is intended to provide trust and opportunity for the traditional community and small scale fishermen to manage certain marine areas (Marine Protection Area/DPL and Traditional Catching Area/DPT).  
     The DPL is allocated and protected as areas for fish to reproducing, spawning, and growing. The DPL will contribute to the growing of fishing stock in surrounding areas. Those areas will later set as DPT where fishermen can harvest using traditional fishing equipment.  The PAAP has become the platform for local fishermen to jointly manage marine areas in groups. They actively monitored DPL and ensure the availability of fish stock in DPT.   
     The traditional community and small scale fishermen of Kolono Bay have jointly established the Kolono Bay Care Forum. They agreed to establish 49.89 ha DPL and 974.67 ha DPT which cover five villages: Lambangi, Tumbu-Tumbu Jaya, 
Ngapawali, Batu Putih and Rumba-Rumba. This Forum is legally recognized by the 
Decree of the Minister of Law and Human Rights No. AHU-0004635.AH.01.07 of 2017. The Forum with their jargons \0xECJAGA, ATUR, MANFAATKAN (guard, manage and use) applied rules called \0xECTHT (TIMBANG, HITUNG, TULIS) or \0xECweigh, count, recordas ways to estimate fish stock and to formulate strategies for sustainable management.    
     The environmental socialization and campaign on the DPL and DPT are carried out through the annual fishermeni festival. The Kolono Bay Festival of 2017 was carried out with the theme \0xECRealizing Traditional Catching Area (DPT) as Fish Source in Kolono Bay. They create competitons among fishermen using fish that have been caught with the above rules. This program provides hope for sustainable fish catch by small-scale fishermen in Kolono Bay to reduce poverty and improve their welfare.  
Kolono Bay Care Forum have been jointly established by local government, society organizations, coastal communities and small scale fishermen to ensure the marine ecosystem sustainability 
 
 
The SSTC, data and 
statistic are important points for Goal 17 
 
3.4.7  Goal 17. Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
     There are two points reported by Indonesia for Goal 17, South-South and Triangular Cooperation or SSTC (Kerja Sama Selatan-Selatan dan Triangular/KSST) and Data and Statistics to achieve the SDGs. Both points are presented in this national review due to its significant meaning for Indonesia in implementing free and active politics as Indonesia's principle on international cooperation. Indonesia has demonstrated its commitment to achieving Goal 17 in both issues by carrying out concrete and measurable efforts. On SSTC, Indonesia has demonstrated efforts as a basis for building subsequent important collaborations of Goal 17. Indonesia has worked towards provision of data with the issuance of an initial portrait of Indonesia's SDGs data as baseline data of SDGs based on Indonesian SDGs metadata that has been compiled. This 
The SSTC 
revitalizes the global partnership for sustainable development 
Effort to increase roles in SSTC: by establishing the National Coordination team and involving all stakeholders.  
 
metadata is compiled by applying the principles of inclusiveness and no-one left behind that involve all parties and active enforcement of public consultation. 
1. Trend and Analysis  
a. South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) 
     Indonesia is committed to increase its role in SSTC, as stated in the Nawacita and RPJMN 2015-2019 which is in line with Goal 17 of the SDGs.In implementating SSTC, Indonesia is assisting other developing countries to achieve the SDGs and ensuring that no-one is left behind among the South-South countries. The SSTC is implemented to pursue the common interests of the southern countries by addressing a fairer, equitable, and mutually beneficial of the world order, as well as, in promoting economic diplomacy with the spirit of solidarity among developing countries. 
     Development cooperation between Indonesia and developing countries in Asia and Africa was initiated with the Asian-African Conference held in 1955 in Bandung. The conference established a political commitment to promote world peace and international cooperation among developing countries. In its development, Indonesia started to participate actively in various South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) programs since 1980. Indonesia has provided various supports within the framework of SSTC to other developing countries in the form of training, workshops, apprenticeship, expert dispatch, scholarships, equipment, and various other forms.  
     Indonesia has implemented two efforts to increase its role in SSTC. First, enhancing coordination by establishing the National Coordination Team (NCT) of SSTC in 2010. The NCT consists of the Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Finance and Ministry of State Secretariat. With the strong role of NCT, it is expected that the implementation of SSTC will sustainably contribute to national and global development. 
     Second, the Government of Indonesia involves academics, community organizations and the private sector to establishon a more inclusive SSTC to accommodate the aspirations, views, and participation of various parties. Implementation of SSTC Indonesia aims to support poverty alleviation programs in a broader context. Several SSTC programs that support poverty alleviation include: food security programs for farmers, stock farmers, and fishermen; assistance on agricultural equipment and machinery; expertsi assistance for food crop agriculture; and knowledge sharing programs for poverty alleviation such as National Program for Community Empowerment (Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyarakat/PNPM) and Family Hope Program (Program Keluarga Harapan/PKH). The Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas also coordinates the Reverse Linkage program that focuses on poverty alleviation through community empowerment models. The Reverse Linkage Program is a Triangular Cooperation involving Indonesia, Islamic Development Bank (IDB), and IDB member countries.  
These are indicators of SDGs Indonesia as development priority inSSTC: 
 
 
     
1) Knowledge Sharing Activities in the Framework of South-South and Triangular Cooperation 
     Indonesiais commitment to implement the SSTC continues to increase from year to year, indicated by the number of knowledge sharing activities in 
Knowledge sharing the last three years (2014 - 2016).  activities of the  

                  Figure 3.49. Number ofSSTC activities Indonesiais increased commitment on SSTC can be measured through a number of programs or modalities that have been implemented, as illustrated in the following table. 
 
Table 3.11. Program Type or SSTC Modalities 2014 n 2016 
Program Type 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Training 
63% 
51% 
49% 
Workshop/Seminar 
7% 
12% 
23% 
Expert Dispatch 
15% 
12% 
10% 
Scholarship*) 
7% 
2%  
4% 
Multi-event activities  
8% 
19% 
13% 
Knowledge sharing 
- 
4% 
2% 
Note:*) Including internships 
 
     The SSTC training programs have been conducted to support Asian countries, including Afghanistan, Timor Leste, Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and the Philippines and African countries such as Ethiopia, Ghana, and Nigeria. The programs have been expanded to South Pacific countries such as Papua New Guinea, Fiji, and Solomon Island. Triangular cooperation, which was initially conducted only with Japan, has also expanded to Germany, UK, USA, and IDB. Cooperation with IDB is primarily to extend Indonesia's support to IDB member countries. 
2) Funding Indication for Capacity Building within the SSTC Indonesia 
Framework 

Figure 3.50.Total SSTC funding indication 
                    In addition to the increasing number of SSTC activities, Indonesia is also Indication of SSTC 
funding for capacity building continues to increase 
Achievements in SSTC include the development of SOPs, budget 
allocation, increasing number of participants as well as the increasing role of 
private and community organizations 
committed to increase the amount of funding for the SSTC program since 2016. The increased budget is expected to be utilized to meet the demand of partner countries that continue to increase from year to year. The Directorate of Technical Cooperation ofthe Ministry of Foreign Affairs has received 296 technical assistance requests from 41 countries in August 2016. 
     Success in the implementation of SSTC program is also shown through the following indicators:  
1) The NCT of SSTC has developed Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) for bussiness proccess of SSTC coordination to improve the performance of Ministries / Institutions in providing assistances. 
2) For the period of 2000-2012, Indonesia organized SSTC programs for Asian, African, Pacific, and Latin American countries with a budget allocation of USD 49.8 million. In 2015, 57 programs were identified related to artificial insemination for cattle, disaster risk management, family planning, planning and budgeting, and community empowerment. Indonesia was also successful insharing knowledge and conducting training on electoral security, vocational education, national road maintenance, transportation, small-medium enterprises, education for trade, the handicraft industry, and archives. The outputs were beneficial for the Southern countries as requested. 
3) The number of participants of the SSTC program increased from 451 participants (2014) to 652 participants (2015). Data on the totalSSTC participants for 2016 is still being calculated from the various SSTC projects that have been carried out by the Ministries/Institutions. In the coming years, the number is expected to increase in line with the increased SSTC budget allocation. 
4) Involvement of the private sector, academics and community organizations in SSTC. One example of the involvement of the private sector is the cooperation between the Ministry of Agriculture and the Sudan Ministry of Agriculture in 2014 with tractor manufacturers in 
Indonesia. The private sector provided training on agricultural 
machinery. Another example is the involvement of private banks in microfinance training by carrying out expert dispatches from Indonesian banks in Myanmar. Indonesian CSOs have also actively provided assistance to other countries for education, humanitarian, inter-faith activities, conflict prevention and disaster management.  
5) The SSTC also provides economic and political benefits for Indonesia, such as trading cooperation of frozen cement commodities with Kyrgyzstan, as well as cooperation with Sudan, Madagascar, and Namibia on agricultural equipment and machinery. 
 
b. Data and Statistics 

The provision of data and statistics in Goal 17 is important for Indonesia, as 
Indonesia has prepared the collection and measurement of baseline for partial indicators of SDGs 
Consumer 
satisfaction on the quality of BPSStatistics Indonesia data reflects the improvement of its data qualityquality 
it supports preparation, collection, and measurement of SDGsi indicators. Most of Indonesia's SDGs indicators have complied with global indicators, whereas the rests are still proxy indicators. Further to this, Indonesia has considerable expertise in providing data and statistics for SDGs, due to its experiences in implementing MDGsi indicators that are relevant to national and subnational data characteristics, as well as in developing new data and indicators to support development planning and implementation.  
The BPS-Statistics Indonesia is the Indonesian National Statistic Office 
(NSO) providing official data for SDGsi implementation in Indonesia. It has compiled statistical data for SDGs indicators and developed databaseof Indonesian SDGs indicators.  
   It has been noted that development of data for SDGs indicators will provide an opportunity to the Indonesian NSO to conduct assessment, quality improvement, and advancement of data that are available in Indonesia. The performance of Indonesian NSO and various indicators measured in Goal 17 are outlined below. 
1) Consumer Satisfaction on BPS-Statistics Indonesia Data Quality 
   In 2014, 80.00 % of consumers were satisfied with data quality provided by BPS-Statistics Indonesia. The level of consumer satisfaction on the quality of BPS-Statistics Indonesia data increased to 89.30% in 2016, reflecting a good achievement of BPS-Statistics Indonesiain providing more reliable and accurate data with  better services to consumers. The level of satisfaction is expected to continuously increase in the future, as BPS-Statistics Indonesia is projected to be a highly respected NSO and able to maintain its international recognition. 
 
Figure 3.51. Percentage of Consumer Satisfaction on BPS-Statistics Indonesia Data Quality, 2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Demand Survey 2016) 
     
The increase in percentage of consumers who use BPS-Statistics Indonesia statistical data and information as their main reference indicates increased user confidence in BPS-Statistics 
Indonesia data 
Number of basic 
statistical, sectoral and specific statistical metadata in SIRuSa BPSStatistics Indonesia has been in an increasing trend 
2) Use of BPS-Statistics Indonesia Data and Information for Main Reference 
     In 2016, it was reported that almost all consumers use BPS-Statistics Indonesia data and information as their main reference (91.35%). This high percentage indicates high consumer confidence in using statistical data and information provided by BPS-Statistics Indonesia. 
 
 
Figure 3.52. Percentage of consumers who use BPS-Statistics Indonesia statistical data and information as main reference, 2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Demand Survey 2016) 
 
3) Basic, Sectoral and Specific Statistical Metadata Available in the Statistical Referral Information System (SIRuSa) 
     Indonesia has an indicator showing the number of basic, sectoral, and specific statistical metadata that has been compiled and presented in the Statistical Referral Information System (SIRuSa) of BPS-Statistics Indonesia. The number of metadata in SIRuSa n which is an important indicator for measuring the level of National Statistics System (SSN) development -- has beenin an increasing trend since 2011. 
 

Figure 3.53. Number of basic, sectoral, and specific statistical metadata in the Statistical Referral Information System (SIRuSa), 2011 - 2016 
Source: BPS-Statiscal Indonesia (Statistical Referral Information System) 
 
Indonesia is among countries having national statistical 
laws 
 
Distribution of statisticians at ministries/government institutions is aimed to produce better quality data 
Data on the BPSStatistics Indonesia website is accessible to external visitors  
4) Number of Countries that Have National Statistical Laws that comply with Official Statistical Fundamental Principles 
      Indonesia has stipulated Law No. 16 of 1997 on Statistics. It governs types of statistics, methodology of data collection for basic, sectoral and specific statistics; statistical institution; dissemination; as well as rights and obligations of statistical institution. 
5) Number of Statisticians and Computer Scientists in Indonesian Ministries/Institutions 
      In 2016, the total number of statisticians working at all ministries/government institutions was 3,728 people. Of that number, 98% are working for BPS-Statistics Indonesia, while the rest of them are workingat12 other government institutions. It means that some of ministries/government institutions do not have adequate numbers of statisticians, and many of them do not have any statistician. Having statisticians in each ministry/government institution is critical, in particular to provide sectoral data with a better quality. However, it is clearly seen that almost all ministries/government institutions have computer scientists for processing data and information. (see Statistical Annex Table 7). 
6) Number of External Visitors Accessing Statistical Data and Information through the Website 
    The BPS-Statistics Indonesia website is visited by 100,000 visitors monthly on average. There were 1,258,381 visitors in total during 2016, and the highest number of visitors was recorded in February and October reaching more than 140,000 people in each month. This proxy indicator is indeed important to assess the accessibility level of external users to get data from BPS-Statistics Indonesia website and to measure the number of users utilizing BPS-Statistics Indonesia data as reference. 
 
 
Figure 3.54. Number of external visitors accessing statistical data and information through the website, 2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Statistical Information Packaging Section) 
 
The percentage of Consumers satisfied with data access to BPS-Statistics Indonesia website has been increasing 
 
Most customers use data for planning as well as monitoring and evaluation 
 
7) Percentage of Consumers Satisfied with Data Access to BPS-Statistics Indonesia Website 
     Another indicator n which is the percentage of consumers satisfied with data access to BPS-Statistics Indonesia website -- is used to measure the satisfaction level of BPS-Statistics Indonesiadata users. It aims to measure BPSStatistics Indonesia improvement in providing easy access to statistical data and information to users. In the last four years, the percentage of consumers satisfied with data access to BPS-Statistics Indonesia website increased from 73% (2013) to 83% (2016), showing a good improvement of BPS-Statistics Indonesia in providing easier data access through the website. 
 

Figure 3.55.  Percentage of Consumers Satisfied with Data Access of BPS-
Statistics Indonesia Website, 2013-2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Consumer Satisfaction Survey) 
 
8) Percentage of Consumers Using BPS-Statistics Indonesia Data for Development Planning and Evaluation 
     The 2015 survey of data demand revealed that most of the data provided by BPS-Statistics Indonesia was used for planning (36.00%) and monitoring/evaluation (27.00%). However, the number of consumers using BPS-Statistics Indonesia data for planning fell to 11.46% in 2016, and most of the data provided in 2016 was used for writing theses/ dissertations. The decline of data use for planning in 2016 was due to the medium-term planning cycle that happened in 2015 to prepare the document of RPJMN 2015 n 2019. This shows the large contribution of BPS-Statistics Indonesiain providing statistical data and information for development planning and policy making process. 
 
 
Figure 3.56. Percentage of consumers using BPS-Statistics Indonesia data in national development planning and evaluation, 2016 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (Demand Survey) 
     Other achievements in the first year of implementation of the SDGs, Indonesia are as follows: 
Metadata and Initial 
Figure of Indonesian SDGs indicators have been developed with inclusive and no-one left behind principles 
a) 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Establishment of Indonesian SDGs metadata with principles of inclusive and no-one left behind. The process of metadata development involved participation of four platforms. There are 135 indicators out of 320 SDGS Indonesia indicators provided by BPSStatistics Indonesia, and it undertook data collection and validation for developing the initial figure of Indonesian SDGs indicators. 
Development of metadata and database of Indonesian SDGs, which was undertaken by BPS-Statistics Indonesia in collaboration with the Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas. With that, Indonesia can develop an initial portrait of Indonesian SDGs  
International 	recognition 	on 	BPS-Statistics 	Indonesia achievements and role. The Head of BPS-Statistics Indonesia was elected as the Chairman of the Statistics Committee for the period of 2017 - 2018 at UN-ESCAP. This appointment was part of international recognition in Asia Pacific region to BPS-Statistics Indonesia, due to its credibility. The BPS-Statistics Indonesia also plays an active role in providing input to the discussion of SDGs indicators at the global level through UNSD, including indicators of Goal 16. 
Sharing of BPS-Statistics Indonesia knowledge and experiences, considering BPS-Statistics Indonesiais good reputation in Asia Pacific region. One of BPS-Statistics Indonesia sharing knowledge to Asia Pacific countries was the 2016 Economic Census that has been successfully implemented. 
 
 
2. Challenges and Improvement Measure 
	a. 	South-South and Triangular Cooperation(SSTC) 
     Since the NCT of SSTC was established in 2010, there are some considerable achievements. However, some challenges still remain as follows: 
The challenges of 	1) 
SSTC are coordination of SSTC activities, calculate the budget allocation, establish evaluation 
mechanism, build 	2) 
public awareness, finding sources, and 
improve qulity of 
SSTC  
3) 
Coordination of SSTC activities in various Ministries / Institutions are not yet structured, effective and efficient. Currently, the NCT has developed Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) that regulates the working mechanisms of each Working Group and the relationship between the NCT and the various stakeholders.  
Accuracy of budget allocation for SSTC implementation. To achieve this, the NCTput the SSTCis activities underone thematic budget, then legalised through the Minister of Finance Decree No.143/PMK.02/2015 on budget tagging. The decree enables to identify the budget allocation in the planning and budgeting process of SSTC activities in various Ministries / Institutions.  
Evaluation of the implementation of SSTCis not conducted properly in accordance with the existing mechanisms and regulations. Thus, the NCT has developed evaluation guidelines including ex-ante, ongoing and ex-post evaluations, based on five criteria of relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, impact and sustainability. 
Challenges in the field of data and statistics are data disaggregation, data coverage, utilization of information systems and technology, data for several global indicators 
4) Communication strategies are not yet comprehensive (promotion and public relations) both internally and externally to increase exposure of SSTC Indonesia. Thus, the NCT developed a SSTC communication strategy. Efforts to increase exposure of SSTC Indonesia are carried out by promoting SSTC Indonesia activities to the public through website, newsletters, and public forums. 
5) The sources of domestic funding for implementation of SSTC activities are still limited. Thus, the NCT has established partnerships with various stakeholders, including the development partners. The involvement of development partners is expected to support the implementation of SSTC Indonesia to be more effective and sustainable. Support is not only in terms of funding, but also for institutional capacity building, implementation of pilot projects, and development of innovative triangular cooperation. 
6) The future challenge is to improve the quality of SSTC in response to the demand, increasing Indonesia's strategic role and contribution in the implementation of SDGs related to SSTC. 
 
b. Data and Statistics 
1) Providing disaggregated data through the principles of no-one left behind is stilla challenge. However, BPS-Statistics Indonesia has made some efforts to develop disaggregated data for district and city level from existing surveys. 
2) Decentralization system in Indonesia has created difficulties for BPS-Statistics Indonesia to provide data for all regions in Indonesia. Decentralized government system has triggered the creation of new administrative areas, which then need new groups of statistical data and information, specifically for those new areas. In this regard, the existing indicators of Indonesian SDGs has not yet included all disaggregated data of district/city level, particularly in new regions.  
 
     
 
Figure 3.57. Grouping 241 Global SDGs Indicators Based on Data Availability 3) Utilization of Information and Communication Technology (ICT) for data processing and management in Indonesia is not yet optimal. This condition creates constrains to ministries/government institutions to do data processing and management effectively. It is necessary in the future to increase the capacity of ICT human resources and infrastructure in ministries/government institutions. 
4) Data on some global SDGs indicators are not yet available. Of the 241 global indicators, Indonesia has identified 86 indicators (35.70%) that are consistent with global indicators,for which national data are available. There are 76 global indicators (31.50%) measured using proxies at the national level, 74 global indicators (30.70%) to be developed, and 5 global indicators (2.10%) that are not relevant to Indonesia. 
5) Collection and validation of sectoral statistical data in Ministries/government institutions still requires BPSi supports, while BPS-Statistics Indonesia itself is lacking of human resources. This issue will be resolved by appointing BPS-Statistics Indonesia as a coordinator of National Statistic System and a bridge in developing metadata. 
3. Innovation and Key Efforts  
     
SSTC's important 	a. innovations and efforts are the 	1) optimization of potential of the private sector and Indonesia's declaration as CLKH 2) b. 1) Innovations in data and statistics include the One Data 
mechanism, SDGs 	2) 
Indonesia metadata, Indonesia's role in the Inter Agency Experts Group 
(IAEG), and Data 
Standardization 
 South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) 
The NCT of SSTC is designing incentive models for private sector involvement fromwhich the private sector can get benefit from the cooperation. This is in line with one of the strategies to enhance Indonesia's role in SSTC as stated in RPJMN 2015-2019. These incentive models are expected to facilitate the involvement of private sector starting from planning, implementation and evaluation phases.   
Knowledge sharing is one of Indonesia's main modalities in providing assistance to Southern countries. In 2012, Indonesia has declared itself as a Country-Led Knowledge Hub (CLKH) focusing on three flagship areas, namely development issues, good governance and peace-building, as well as economic issues. 
Data and Statistics 
Indonesia is currently developing a national one-data policy, appointing BPS-Statistics Indonesia to be the coordinator and center of One Data system. 
Indonesia has developed Indonesia SDGs metadata consisting of 320 indicators, and 234 of which is proxy indicators of global indicators. Indonesia SDGs metadata is expected to be the reference for preparing action plan documents at both nationally and regionally, through the principles of inclusive and no-one left behind.   
     
3) Indonesia's proposal on an update of SDGs Indicators will be discussed at the Inter Agency Experts Group (IAEG). 
4) Data standardization has been developed through strengthening data management in all Ministries/government institutions. 
 

Figure 3.58.  One Data Portal and SDG Data Visualization Platform 
 
4. EmergingIssues 
a. South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) 
The needs of formulating regulation on grants, strengthening institutional, and strengthening funding mechanism 
1) 
2) 
3) 
Strengthening the regulatory framework specifically for the SSTC business process. Development of a regulatory framework aims to improve the effectiveness of SSTC implementation and efficiencyin utilising the budget. Furthermore, a Government Regulation needs to be formulated to regulate the Government of Indonesia grants for foreign government. This encourages Indonesia not only as a recipient but as a provider to assist the other developing countries.  Strengthening institutional framework,which can improve the coordination to a one gate policy, toward the establishment of a single agency. Currently, the NCT of SSTC is formulating the most suitable institution for the single agency. One of the options explored is an institution that can manage pooling of funds. 
Strengthening the funding framework to support the SSTC program. Funding of the SSTC program is planned to be increased by contribution of the government funding (including local governments), the private sector, philanthropy, and development partners. 
 
b. Data and Statistics 
1) Indonesia will review Law no. 16 of 1997 on Statistics to further comply with the fundamental principles of official statistics. This is to improve BPS-Statistics Indonesiais capacity in monitoring the increasing needs of national statistical data.  
Review of 
Regulations so that there is a clear 
division of government matters 
in the field of statistics 
2) 
Law no. 23 of 2014 has been referred by local governments for establishing statistic units under their authorities. However, their functions and roles seem to overlap with statistical offices under BPS-Statistics Indonesia authority located in district/municipality levels. This has raised concerns on the urgent need of revising appendix of Law No. 23/2014, because some provisions of this law created unclear division of responsibilities and may affect a decrease of data quality.  
5. Lessons Learned 
     
The lessons taken from data issues are increasing IT usage, increasing the role of BPS-Statistics Indonesia in international fora, and the importance of metadata for development planning referrals 
 
 
 
a. South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) 
1) Categorized as a middle-income country, Indonesia has benefited from playing a dual role as a recipient country and as a provider that provides assistance to other developing countries. This is a demonstration of Indonesia's independence and active foreign policy in promoting the common interests of Southern countries in order to create a fairer and equitable world order.   
2) Indonesia SSTC emphasizes on knowledge sharing. While providing the knowledge to be shared to other countries, Indonesia also benefited from other countryislearning development experiences. (two-way process). 
3) The SSTC has become an instrument in bringing forward  Indonesian interests to international fora, politically and economically. 
 
b. Data and Statistics 
1) The BPS-Statistics Indonesia has used computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) in conducting surveys, such as: health and life experience survey in Papua. 
2) Increasing the role of BPS-Statistics Indonesia and its staff in international fora. 
3) The process of developing SDGs data and indicators has created a good communication among stakeholders, particularly in the stages of data collection, utilization, and analysis that involves all parties concerned. The process of developing SDGs data has created understanding among stakeholders on the importance of data quality and management.  
3.5 	THEMATIC ANALYSIS 
     The theme of 2017 HLPF on SDGs is: \0xECEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world. Indonesia has made many efforts towards poverty alleviation in the past 10 yeas, and has successfully reduced the percentage of population living in poverty from 17.75% (2006) to 10.70% 
4) Development of Indonesia SDGs metadata has established an understanding among stakeholders on the importance of indicator metadata as a main reference for development planning process as well as for monitoring and evaluation process. 
The focus of VNR 2017 is directed at improving the quality of human resources and increasing economic opportunities to create sustainable livelihoods 
(2016). Both the total number and the severity and depth index have decreased, even though the absolute number of poverty is still significant (22.76 million people).  Currently, the great challenge faced by Indonesia is how to further reduce poverty and to improve the welfare of the population. In light of the seven goals to be reported in the 2017 VNR, Indonesia formulates the interconnectedness between the Goals and theme as follows: 
     Indonesiais VNR report focuses on two main aspects: (1) Improving the quality of human resources and (2) Enhancing economic opportunities for sustainable livelihood. Improving the quality of human resources focuses on achievements in the Health sector (Goal 3), Food Security and Sustainable Agriculture (Goal 2), and Education (Goal 4). Although education is not one at the goals to be reported in 2017 VNR, it is nevertheless important for and closely related with poverty alleviation efforts. 
	Additionally, 	improving 
economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods is achieved through increased efforts in the industrial sector, innovation and infrastructure (Goal 9) as well as sustainable use and conservation marine ecosystem (Goal 14). The two main aspects can be achieved with the support of enabling factors, including gender (Goal 5), partnerships in various sectors, data, and sustainable financing (Goal 17). 
 
1. Interconnectedness between the Theme and Goals 
     As mentioned above, for the purpose of aligning with the theme of 2017 HLPF, Indonesia has identified two main aspects; (1) improving human resource development and (2) enhancing economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods, with relevant SDGs Goals to be reported in the 2017 VNR. Indonesian alleviation strategy reflected in the 2015-2019 RPJMN is focuses on 3 issues: comprehensive social protection, the provision and improved access to basic services, and sustainable livelihoods. Achievements of the interconnected goals are as follows: 
1.a. Improving Human Resources Development 
     Human resources development in Indonesia is achieved by development efforts in three main areas: food security and nutrition (Goal 2), health and wellbeing (Goal 3) and education. Although education (Goal 4) is not included in 
     
the discussion of the 2017 VNR, it is necessary to emphasize the importance of education for poverty alleviation and welfare improvement. 
The Government of Indonesia has implemented various efforts in the 

health sector, including development of the National Social Security System 
Indonesia has developed the the National Social 
Security System (SJSN) for health sector National Health Insurance 
/JKN 
(Sistem Jaminan Sosial Nasional - SJSN). One of the implementation of this system is the National Health Insurance (Jaminan Kesehatan Nasional- JKN) enacted in 2014 through the issuance of the Indonesia Health Card (Kartu Indonesia Sehat - KIS). The JKN provides health insurance for the poor (Premium Assistance Beneficiaries or Penerima Bantuan Iuran - PBI), for which the contribution is paid by the government. The number of Health Cards (KIS) recipients in 2016 was 171.9 million people (66.4% of the population), an increased of 51.80% in 2014. The JKN is one of the largest social health 
insurance schemes in the world. 
     The challenges of JKN implementation are, among others, the still less then optimum data in the Integrated Database (Basis Data Terpadu - BDT) as a reference for poverty alleviation program. Moreover, the JKN coverage is yet to be widened to reach informal workers and wage laborers. Several measures have been taken to improve the system, including the development of the Integrated Services and Referral System (Sistem Layanan dan Rujukan Terpadu - SLRT) scheme and the self-registration mechanism (Mekanisme Pemutakhiran Mandiri -MPM) with the involvement of the local governments. 
     One of the important health effort in Indonesia is the program to accelerate the reduction of maternal mortality. The Maternal Mortality Ratio (MMR) has decreased from 346 to 305 per 100,000 live births (Inter Censal Population Survey 2015). Several efforts to reduce the MMR include the implementation of the Universal Delivery Care (Program Jaminan Persalinan- Jampersal) that has been integrated into the National Social Security System (SJSN) and the establishment of the Minimum Service Standard (Standar Pelayanan Minimal - SPM) in the health sector.  
     The Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) and Under Five Mortality Rate (Angka Kematian Balita-AKBa) are constantly decreasing. The IMR has decreased from 68 1991 to 32 (2012) per 1000 live birth (Indonesia Demographic and Health Survey n IDHS). In the same period, the under five mortality rate (AKBa) has decreased from 97(1991) to 40 (2012) per 1000 live birth(IDHS). The greatest challenge faced in reducing the MMR and Under Five Mortality Rate is the quality of maternal health care including the competency of health care providers, and adequate availability of health care facilities, delivery equipment and hospitals.  
     Another comprehensive effort is the implementation of the Conditional Cash Transfer program which targets the poors and vulnerable families, through the Family Hope Program (Program Keluarga Harapan - PKH). The coverage of the PKH has increased almost 6-fold from 1.1 million families in 2011 to 6 million families in 2016. 
     
Indonesia has succeeded in reducing food insufficiency through increased agricultural, livestock and fishery production 
The Government is accelerating nutrition improvement through the First 
1000 Days of Life 
Movement 
     In the food and nutrition sector, Indonesia has managed to increase the sufficiency of food consumption. In 2015, rice production reached 75.40 million tons and maize 19.61 million tons. At this production rate, in aggregate, Indonesia has been able to meet the need of rice as a staple food. Beef production in the period of 2006-2015 grew by 3.11% per year, and egg production by4.50% per year. In addition, chicken meat production in the period of 2010-2015 grew by 5.74% per year.  
     Other food source and nutrient originate from marine fishery. The government has initiated the movement to promote fish consumption (Gerakan Memasyarakatkan Makan Ikan - GEMARIKAN) to increase the awareness of the population on the importance of consuming fish. The production of marine fisheries has steadily increased from 4.80 million tons in 2011 to 5.30 million tons in 2014, the level which is still below the allowable fish catchment. 
     The quality of food consumption of the Indonesian population has increased, as marked by the Desirable Dietary Pattern Score (Pola Pangan Harapan - PPH), by an average of 82.9 during the period of 2009 - 2013. Indonesia has also increased the availability of sustainable food and agricultural productivity. This is marked by the release of 57 new superior rice varieties (Varietas Unggul Baru - VUB), 25 VUB of corn and 10 VUB of soybean. The challenges in increasing the food production include the functional shift of agricultural land. To addres this problem, the government has accelerated the issuance of Regional Regulations on the allocations of areas for sustainable food agriculture, intensifiying agricultural research and development of agricultural technology and innovation. 
     The nutritional status of pregnant women, infants and under-five indicate improvement, albeit still below expectation. The Basic Health Research (Riset Kesehatan Dasar - Riskesdas) reveals that the prevalence of wasting of underfive has decreased significantly from 13.6% in 2007 to 9.8% in 2016. The prevalence of under-five stunting (short and very short) has decreased from 36.8% in 2007 to 33.6% in 2016 (National Health Indicator Survey or Survei Indikator Kesehatan NasionalnSirkesnas). In addition, the coverage of exclusive breastfeeding for infants aged six months has increased from 15.3% in 2010 to 30.2% in 2013 (Riskesdas). Challenges faced in the improvement of food and nutrition is the lack of strong coordinated approach to improve food and nutrition across sectors. Therefore, the implementation of the First 1000 Days of Life Movement (Hari Pertama Kehidupan - HPK) has been intensified. The first 1000 days of life movement is integrated interventions to reduce the prevalenceof stunting and the other forms of malnutrition. 
clean water and sanitation. The proportion of the poor and vulnerable population groups who have access to clean water has increased from 61.57% in 2015 to 
61.94% in 2016. In the same period, access to sanitation has increased from 47.76% to 54.12%.   
     Basic social services to reduce the poverty incidence and improve population welfare are a precondition for the poor to gain a sustainable livelihood. The provision of basic social services for the poor is the main responsibility of the government and is implemented through the enactment of affirmative policies to fulfill the basic rights of the poor. The improved access to basic services for the poor will increase health, well-being, and educational level and thus facilitate the attainment of sustainable livelihood. 
1.b Enhancing Economic Opportunities for Sustainable Livelihoods 
      Poverty reduction and welfare improvement in Indonesia is indicated by the increase in sustainable livelihood along with the decline of Indonesian population living below USD 1.25 per capita per day (PPP) from 28.32% in 2006 to 8.8% in 2015. In addition, the national unemployment rate has decreased from 10.28% in 2006 to 5.61% in 2016. GDP per capita has also increased from USD 1,420 in 2006 to USD 3,605 in 2016. This achievement was, among others, contributed by the more available economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods. 
     Infrastructure construction and industrial development supports opening of new economic opportunities. Achievements in infrastructure 
     Improvement of food and nutrition is closely related to education and environmental conditions. Education impacts behavior (parenting and eating patterns), which in turn affects the nutritional status of children. Children born to parents with low educational level tend to have worse nutritional status. Therefore, access to education should be improved. Among the poor and vulnerable population groups (40 % of the lowest-income population), theratio of Net Enrollment Rate of females/males students in 2016 in Primary Schools and equivalent education program is 99.93%; at the Junior High School level and the equivalent education program is 107.93%; and at the Senior High School level and the equivalent education program is 112.19%. These have indicated that the participation level of girls in primary and secondary education has increased over time. The nutritional status is also related to household access to Increasing economic opportunities to create sustainable livelihoods supported by infrastructure, industrial, and marine development 
To address the challenges in developing industries and infrastructure, the government is promoting partnership with the private sectors and developing alternative financing 
schemes  
construction are demonstrated by the acceleration of road infrastructure, toll roads, railways, ports and airports, particularly in the eastern regions of Indonesia to reduce poverty and inequality. The steady road conditions reached 94% in 2014, railroad lengths increased by almost 100% in the last four years, ports increased by 244 during the last three years. Assigning priority of infrastructure construction in remote, and frontier areas, has reduced price disparities of daily needs, and helps reduce the burden of the low income and poor people.  
Infrastructure development is the back-bond for industrial development.  
By 2016, 3 (three) new industrial areas has operated in Eastern Indonesia. The Indonesian industrial development is focused on labor-intensive industries and industries that process local resources. Industries in this category are able to absorb a large amount of workforce, increase value added, as well as provide multiplier effects to the local and surrounding areas. Through the development of agglomeration and deepening of industries, employments will be higher and are closely related to poverty reduction. The manufacturing industry sector is able to absorb a workforce of more than 12% of the total workforce every year. The industrial sector is the largest contributor to the GDP, followed by the agricultural sector. The contribution of the non-oil and gas processing industry to the GDP has increased since 2013, eventhough the increased of the percentage is not yet significant. 
     The challenges of developing inclusive industries and infrastructure are, among others, insufficient budget that is being addressed through promoting partnerships with the private sector and developing alternative financing schemes, i.e. Non-Annual State Budget (Pembiayaan Investasi Non Anggaran Pemerintah - PINA) investments and infrastructure financing guarantees. The challenges of the decreased contribution of the industrial sector to the GDP are 
Development of the marine sector has been implemented through, among others, the conservation of 17.9 million hectares of marine areas from the 20 million hectares of the MPA target and increased number of small loans in the fisheries sectors. 
The challenge of the marine sector includes adequate management of MPAs, combating IUU fishing and enhance assistance for small-scale fishermen  
addressed by the policy that recognizes the establishment of new industrial zones as a national priority. The development of pro-poor-oriented industries is realized with the development of agricultural-based, and local resources industries, and the development of labor-intensive industries.  
     Increased economic opportunities for sustainable livelihoods are also achieved in the marine sector in Indonesia. Besides rich in terrestrial resources, as an archipelagic country with the worldis largest marine area, Indonesia has enormous marine resources. From 1990 to 2016, Indonesia has declared 17.9 million hectaresi marine conservation areas consisting of 165 Marine Protected Areas (MPAs). By 2020, the Government of Indonesia targets to establish 20 million hectares of MPAs. Indonesia is also focusing the management effectiveness of the MPA to ensure the improvement of the peopleis welfare. The MPA ensures the sustainability of nursery grounds and spawning grounds, so that the economically valuable fish can be consumed by the community in a sustainable and responsible manner. The economic values of the conservation areas are implemented through fishing activities, cultivation, marine tourism, research and education. Indonesia also strictly combats illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU Fishing).  
     To support small-scale fishermen, during the period of 2012-2016, Indonesia has provided micro credits to the fisheries sector with an average increased credit volume of 10% per year. Number of micro credit recipients also increased in average 158% annually from 6,644 recipients (2012) to 48,513 recipients (2016). In the framework to protect small fishermen, insurance assistance, land certification, cooperation establishment and information systems for fishermen have been provided. 
     Challenges in the utilization of fishery and marine resources are, among others, ineffective management of MPAs. This requires increased institutional and infrastructure facilities in managing MPAs. Another challenge is to ensure that combating IUU fishing leads to full utilization of fishery productive potentials. This requires adequate facilities, infrastructure and human resources to utilize fishery potentials that previously was illegally taken by foreign vessels. Another challenge is in providing assistance to small fishermen while preventing the occurrence of over fishing. Therefore, regulation to arrange the utilization of funding aids for small-scale fishermen by maintaining the sustainable use of fish resources needs to be prepared. 
2. Enabling Environment 
     The achievement of interrelated and mutually-reinforcing goals of the two aspects of poverty alleviation and welfare improvement in Indonesia cannot be separated from the support of enabling environment i.e. partnership, gender equality, data availability, and financing as well as Indonesiais contribution at the global level.  
2.a Partnership 
     Multi-stakeholders partnership in SDGs implementation on poverty alleviation and prosperity improvement is necessary needed because poverty can not be solved by the governmentalone. The implementation of policies related to accessibility of basic social services, inclusive development, small-scale agricultural and fisheries development can not rely only to the government but 
     
Achievement of interrelated goals can not be separated from enabling environment such as partnerships, gender equality, data availability, and financing 
also to be supported by private sector, community organizations and academics. Such join efforts should be supported by synchronized policies, at the national and sub-national levels to ensure synergy between stakeholders. Furthermore, multi-stakeholders partnership, wether among government institutions, between government and non-state actors, or between national and subnational government, could facilitate capacity development of all parties in implementing SDGs.  
Partnerships through the use of innovative mechanisms are not only useful 
for the implementation of SDGs, but also address Indonesiais diversity. For example, the use of cashless mechanisms that can increase target accuracy, reduce fraud, and simultaneously encourage financial inclusion has been applied in, the Healthy Indonesia Card, Smart Indonesia Card, Indonesia Welfare Card and the Family Hope Program. The system requires partnerships between the national and sub national governments, supported by the private sector and banking sector in using an Integrated Database for the poor to apply the noncash payment system. To protect small fishermen, assistance for their insurance premium has been initiated since 2016. 
2.b Gender Equality and Equity 
     Gender equality and equity is an enabling factor in achieving all Goals of SDGs that has also been mainstreamed in the Indonesian development agenda through the enactment of special regulations on Gender Mainstreaming and Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting. In the VNR 2017, gender is an enabling factor for health, basic services, education, politics and managerial, technology, financial services including micro-finance that is reflected by disaggregated data. 
     Child marriages is an important issue that affect the achievement of the SDGs targets. Most women who get married at in their childhood live in the lowest income level households6. In 2016, 20% of women aged 20-24 years who were married for the first time before age 18.  Albeit decreasing almost 20% compared to 2008, the trend in the last eight years indicates a slower decline. A faster decline occurs to the proportion of women whose first marriage occurs when they are below 15 years old. In 2016, the proportion of women aged 2024 years who were married before age 15 has declined by one-third from 2008. The high percentage of young and child marriages have resulted to the high number of the Aged Specific Fertility Rate (ASFR) of women between 15-19 years old (48 per 1000 females). This problem requires Communication, Information and Education program to improve public awareness. 
     In the politics, the opportunity for women to be involved in decision makinghas increased. In 2004 election, the representation of women in the House of Representatives was 11.84%. This proportion increased to 17.86% in 2009 and slightly declined to 17.30% in 2014. The proportion of women in managerial positions in government agencies (Echelon I-IV) for period of 20112015 also shows an increased trend.  
     The low representation of women in parliament is a challenge for gender equalityand equity, as Law No. 8/ Year 2012 on the General Election mandated an affirmative action and set a target of 30% women representation in the House of Representative. Therefore, continuous dissemination, public awareness, grooming and capacity building for women cadres and legislative candidates on a regular basis are needed. 
     While the Gender Mainstreaming Regulations in Indonesia are quite strong, their implementation face number of challenges, such as lack of mindset and political will for gender mainstreaming as well as the inavailability of disaggregated data. Thus, improving the comprehension and knowledge, as well as identifying lessons-learned are necessary for implementing gender mainstreaming strategy. 
2.c Data Availability 
     The availability of valid and reliable data and information is a key prerequisite to make an informed decision and formulate policy to alleviate poverty and improve welfare, as well as to ensure that no one is left behind. The inclusive process in developing Indonesian SDGs metadata provides important lessons in the form of common measurable references for planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation and reporting. 
     SDGs also provide opportunities for developing data, in particular to measure environmentally sustainable behavior of the community. The provision of dissagregated data based on the principle of no-one left behind is a challenge. At the moment, Indonesia is developing One Data portal that is coordinated by Bappenas, Office of the Presidential Staff (KSP) and BPS-Statistics Indonesia.  
2.d Indonesiais Role in the South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) 
     As a lower middle income country, Indonesia would like to contribute to the effort of other developing countries in advancing the SDGs and has thus performed a role as a \0xECprovider and not only as a \0xECrecipient country through its South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) program. The SSTC is a knowledge sharing framework that benefits not only the assisted country but also Indonesia itself through international cooperation. Indonesia takes an inclusive SSTC framework and therefore the Government of Indonesia has involved various stakeholders in its implementation.  
     Indonesiais SSTC implementation is also directed to support poverty alleviation program in a wider context, in both Indonesia and other developing countries. Several SSTC programs that support poverty alleviation include support for food security programs for farmers, animal husbandary and fishermen, assistance for agricultural equipments and machineries, expert assistance in the food crop agriculture and knowledge sharing on poverty alleviation programs such as the National Program for Community Empowerment and the aforementioned Family Hope Program. The Ministry of 
National Development Planning/Bappenas also coordinates the \0xECReverse Linkage program that is focused on poverty alleviation through community empowerment model, in the form of a Triangular cooperation involving Indonesia, IDB and IDB member countries.  
     Several training programs conducted through the SSTC schemes are, among others, the triangular program on capacity building for Timor Leste road engineers in 2014 between the Government of Indonesia, Timor-Leste and Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA). Another example is training on development strategic partnership between faith-based organizations and 
     
Presidential Decree on the SDGs is the highest form of commitment to implementing the SDGs  
Muslim leaders in Family Planning in 2014 and 2015 involving Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Ghana, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan and the Philippines. 
     Challenges in the SSTC implementation include the limited source of domestic funding. To that end, the SSTC National Coordination Team has established partnerships with various parties, including development partners. The involvement of development partners is expected to support the implementation of Indonesiai SSTC program more effectively and sustainably. This is not only in terms of funding, but also in the areas of institutional capacity building, implementation of pilot projects, and the development of innovative triangular cooperation modalities. 
 
2.f. SDGs Financing 
    Indonesia continues to improve the quality of government spending, starting with a more effective and efficient planning, enhancing cooperation between the government and private sector in financing strategic projects,and promoting bank services to support development.  In terms of tax revenues, various attempts are made by the government through the implementation of Law no. 16 year 2016 on Tax Amnesty. This effort is made in order to reduce dependence on assistance from development partners (Official Development Assistance/ODA).  
     Other alternative financing for the implementation of SDGs is from philanthropic and business funds, as well as religious social funds. The SDGs Indonesia Action Plan document will include contributions and commitments from non-state actors consisting of philanthropy and businesses and community organizations. The contribution of philanthropy and businesses will be documented, so that it can be measured, monitored and evaluated as part of achieving SDGs in Indonesia.  
     Indonesia has also prepared guidelines for green banking and green financing. The Financial Services Authority has the role to support this sustainable finance program.The program involves cooperation of various stakeholders to provide financing for institutions that apply sustainable finance principles. In its implementation, it still needs increasing private awareness and supported by enabling regulation. 
    The challenges of domestic resource mobilization are unsustainable activities which can potentially support sustainable development. In addition, the use of CSR funds may not fully reach the right beneficiaries and suitable programs, thus the mapping of CSR activities and program to synergize with the development program is required. 
 
3.6 	INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISM 
     The highest form of commitment to implementing SDGs in Indonesia is the enactment of the Presidential Decreeon SDGs Indonesia that stipulates the establishment of a National Coordination Team. The National Coordination Team comprises of Steering Committee, Implementation Team, Working Groups and Expert Team (Figure 3.60). As a form of inclusive SDGs implementation, non-state actors are integral part of the National Coordination Team.  
     
     The National Coordination Team is chaired by the President and Vice President of the Republic of Indonesia as Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Steering Committee. Besides that, four Coordinating Ministers of the Cabinet, namely the Coordinating Minister for Economic Affairs, Coordinating Minister for Human Development and Culture, Coordinating Minister for Maritime Affairs, and Coordinating Minister for Political, Legal, and Security Affairs are also assigned as Vice Chairs.  
 
 
Figure 3.60. The SDGs Indonesia National Coordination Team 

     Members of the Steering Committee consists of seven key Ministers relevant to the implementation of the SDGs in Indonesia, namely the Minister of National Development Planning/Head of Bappenas who is mandated as the Implementation Coordinator, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Minister of 
Foreign Affairs, the Minister of Finance, the Minister of State-Owned 
Enterprises, the Cabinet Secretary and the Presidential Chief of Staff. This Steering Committee is responsible for providing guidancein achieving the SDGs in Indonesia.  
The Implementation Team is chaired by the Deputy of Marine and Natural 
The National Coordination Team comprises of 
Steering Committee, Working Groups and Expert Team. 
Resources Affairs of the Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas, with members comprising of elements from Ministries/Government Institutions, Philanthropists and Business Actors, Academics and Community Organizations. 
The Implementation Team is responsible for implementing the directions of the Steering Committee in formulating and recommending policies and coordinating the implementation of the SDGs. The Implementation Team is also supported by the Expert Team, that provides substantive recommendations, and consists of experts and/or professionals in the relevant field to SDGs implementation in Indonesia.  
     In carrying out its duties the Implementation Team is assisted by Working Groups consisting of four main pillars namely Working Group on Social 
Development Pillar, Working Group on Economic Development Pillar, Working Group on Environmental Development Pillar, andWorking Group on Justice and Governance Pillar. These Working Groupsare coordinated by government representatives with members that consist of representatives from Ministries/Government Institutions, Philanthropists and Business Actors, Academics and Community Organizations. To facilitate the preparation and implementation of SDGs, the National Coordination Team is assisted by a 
secretariat that is coordinated by one the unit of the Ministry of National Development Plan/Bappenas 
     The Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas as the Implementation Coordinator has consulted with all stakeholders in order to obtain agreement regarding the representation of non-state actors in the National Coordination Team. The process of involving and effecting the participation of non-state actors is not an easy and simple matter. The challenge is how to create a platform representation mechanism that is accepted by all parties. Representation of a community organization platform is based on the mission and area of concern, while representation of the academic platform is based on the expertise and competence of the related universities, moreover representation of the platform for Philanthropists and Business Actors is based on the field of work and the focus of the activities to be supported. 
     Indonesia has more than 4,400 public and private universities. Consultations for representation of academics are conducted with the involvementof selected public and private universities. It was agreed that Universitas Gajah Mada Yogyakarta as one of the universities in Java was to become the representative of the academic platform in the SDGs Implementation Team. The university was selected because it has demonstrated to have applied the principle of no-one left behind in various aspects, among others, the various courses and acceptance of its students. Nevertheless, universities that represent areas outside Java still need to be selected. The representation of the academic platform within the SDGs Working Group will be based on skills and competencies of the related university. 
     Indonesia is also the largest archipelagic country in the world with diverse ethnicities and races on every island, and has various types of community organizations. Indonesia has a vast number of community organizations, which can be categorized into faith-based organizations, social organizations, advocacy organizations and trade unions. Their distribution is uneven in each region and island. The Ministry of National Development Planning / Bappenas has conducted intensive communication and consultation with representatives of several community organizations including religious organizations to ensure their representation in the SDGs Implementation Team and Working Groups.  
     Obtaining agreement on representation of the Philanthropists and Business platform wasan easier process. This is because the platform has done internal consolidation and coordination by establishing a Forum of Philanthropy and Business - Indonesia for SDGs (FBI4SDGs). This forum comprises of 11 business associations with an approximate total membership of 700 companies. The forum has selected their representatives for the SDGs Implementation Team and Working Groups.  
Besides institutional arangement, the Presidential Decree also provides 
The Presidential legal basis for the implementation of SDGs in Indonesia, including in provinces Decree also serves as and districts/municipalities. As the Coordinator of the Implementation Team, the legal basis for the Minister of National Development Planning/Head of Bappenas formulates the implementation and establishes a SDGs Road Map and National Action Plan. At the Provincial of the SDGs at the level, Governor has the responsibility to develop a Regional Action Plan regional level. together with all Regents and Mayors within theregion. Development of the National Action Plan and the Regional Action Plan involves all elements from the government and non-state actors and promotes public participation by opening public consultations both offline and online. The national and regional 
     
The reporting of the implementation of SDGs is done in stages 
 
action plans include government and non-state actors programs for the achievement of SDGs.   
     The action plans are developed and reported annually from the regional level up to the national level. Governors report the achievement of SDGs targets at the regional level to the Minister of National Development Planning/Head of Bappenas and the Minister of Home Affaris. The Minister of National Development Planning/Head of Bappenas consolidates the reports to be a national report that is submitted to the President. The annual reporting mechanism reflects a bottom-up, participatory and inclusive process. 

Strengthening of mobilization of domestic resources is undertaking by promoting publicprivate partnership in funding strategic projects, developing banking services, increasing tax revenues, and exploring other potential sources of financing from philanthropy, donation from diasporas and religious social funds 
Challenges in mobilizing domestic resources are unsustainable business activities, programs inefficacy and the inability of CSR funds to fully reach the intended beneficiaries 
4 CHAPTER 4 n MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION 
 
 
     Indonesia has developed Means of Implementation that are relevant to support the achievement of SDGs. This includes strengthening domestic resource mobilization, expansion of the use of technology including Information Communication and Technology (ICT) for development, multistakeholder partnerships, coherent coordination as well as capacity building. 
4.1 	STRENGTHENING DOMESTIC RESOURCE MOBILIZATION 
     Indonesia continues to improve the quality of government spending. These efforts start with effective and efficient planning, and includes promoting publicprivate partnerships in funding strategic projects as well as developing banking services to support development in various fields. In terms of tax revenue, various efforts have been made by the government through the implementation of Law no. 16 of 2016 on Tax Amnesty, to minimize dependence on assistance from development partners (Official Development Assistance/ODA). 
     Other potential sources of financing for development in SDGs implementation includes funding from Philanthropy and Business actors, donation from Indonesiais diasporas overseas, as well as religious social funds. The amount of contributions from Philanthropy and Business Actors will be documented in the matrix of action plans at both the national and regional levels, so that it can be measured, monitored and evaluated as part of the achievement of the SDGs in Indonesia.  
     To support activities that are in line with sustainable development, Indonesia has developed green banking and green financing guidelines. The Financial Services Authority (OJK) supports Indonesiais commitment of reducing greenhouse gases through a sustainable finance program. This program is a collaboration of various parties to support fundingfor institutions that apply  sustainable finance principles. Nevertheless, its effective implementation needs better awareness of the private sector and conducive regulations. 
     Challenges in the mobilization of domestic resources include, among others, unsustainable business activities, programs inefficacy and the inability of CSR funds to fully reachthe intended beneficiaries. Thus, mapping of all CSR activities that support development program is needed in order to create synergy.  
4.2 	EXPANDING THE USE OF TECHNOLOGY 
     The RPJMN 2015 - 2019 contains plans to develop techno parks atthe district/municipal level and science parks at the provincial level. The aim is to create centers for the development of advanced science and technology, cultivating entrepreneurship in advanced technology, and advanced technology services. Both technology centers are expected to drive innovation and industriesthus increasing employment opportunities and community income that will ultimately reduce poverty and improve welfare.  
The expansion of technology through egovernment in business processes in government bureaucracy. Egovernment is supported by improvement and development of an optical fiber backbone network as well as broadband access penetration to promote equal distribution of access to information in all regions 
The challenges in the field of technology and science is increasing the support of the goods and services production sectors to become more efficient, productive, competitive and sustainable 
     To achieve clean, accountable, effective and efficient bureaucracy, Indonesia has also implemented e-government as an effort to increase public participation. Some examples of e-Government are as follows: (a) government to citizen (G2C) through implementation of e-KTP (electronic national ID card), and e-Immigration; (b) government to business (G2B) through implementation of e-Procurement, Ina Trade, and National Single Windows (NSW); and (c) government to government (G2G) through implementation of e-Planning, eBudgeting, and e-Auditing.  
     One of e-government portals that continues to be improved is eprocurement. E-procurement is a national procurement portal in the form of an electronic procurement information system for procuring government goods or services. The portal is developed and managed by the National Procurement Agency (LKPP) andis intended to improve transparency and accountability in governmentprocurement. In 2013, the proportion of e-procurement usage was 30% and is targeted to increase and reach 80% by 2019. The use of technology is an application of the no-one left behind principle, which makes community involvement easier and reaches all segments of society. 
     Indonesia has improved and developed an optical fiber backbone network and broadband access to promote equal distribution of information in order to support the implementation ofe-government. Telecommunication access services are improved to reduce digital divide between regions to access universal information and communications and the internet, especially in disadvantaged, border and outermost regions. Thisis also an attempt to apply the principle of inclusiveness.  
     In 2016, the internet user rate for population aged above 5 years was only about 25.37%; however, this rate increases every year along with the development of technology in the ICT field. This increaseis expected to expand access to information for all residents including those in disadvantaged, border and outermost regions. 
     The application of such technology is alsoundertaken to support the achievement of SDGs, for example, the application of special cards for the poor to access conditional cash transfers of the Family Hope Program (PKH). Internalization of technology and information in developmentprogram facilitates people to access it. 
     The challenge in the field of science and technology is how to increase support for the productive sectors as to be more efficient, industrious, and competitive. Science and technology are closely related to Goal 9 (Infrastructure, Innovation, and Industry) in creating goods and services productive sectors that are more industrious and efficient. This effort is to ensure the sustainability of people's livelihoods to support poverty alleviation. The development of science and technology is also intended to support sustainable use of natural resources.  
 
4.3 	MULTISTAKEHOLDER PARTNERSHIP 
     As one of countries that promotes partnership principle at the global level, Indonesia has been applying the principle of multistakeholder partnership at the country level. This principle is implemented at all stages of SDGs implementation, including the 2017VNR formulation process. In this regard, the Ministry of National Development Planning/Bappenas coordinates this process 
     
from planning, implementation to monitoring and evaluation as well as reporting.  
Multi-stakeholders partnership enables all stakeholders to contribute to SDGs implementation efforts including online and offline public consultations 
Coherent coordination is undertaken in various and mutually complementary aspects, namely legal framework, institutional arrangement, program substance, and financing  
based on mutual trust among Government, Philanthropy and Business Actors, Academics, and Community Organizations. This is reflected in the representation of each party as members of the SDGs National Coordination Team. This partnership enables all stakeholders to actively involve in determining the direction of SDGs implementation, such as the formulation of Indonesian SDGs metadata and technical guidelines for formulating SDGs action plan consultation were conducted both online and offline. 
     The implementation of innovative mechanisms through partnership enables an inclusive response to Indonesia's diversity. Examples of multistakeholders partnership is found in some of poverty alleviation program. The non-cash distribution mechanisms in social services that has been conducted in the last there years, requires partnerships between national and sub-national governments with the support of private sector and banking system. The noncash distribution mechanisms in this regard is implemented through Healthy Indonesia Card (Kartu Indonesia Sehat/KIS), Smart Indonesia Card (Kartu Indonesia Pintar/KIP), Family Welfare Card (Kartu Keluarga Sejahtera/KKS) and Family Hope Program (Program Keluarga Harapan/PKH). 
 
4.4 	COHERENT COORDINATION 
Indonesia has prepared the implementation of SDGs from various aspects: 
legal framework, institutional arrangement, program substance, and financing. These four aspects form a unified approach that is coherent and mutually complementary in order to achieve SDGs in Indonesia. From the aspect of legal framework, the basis for coherent coordination is providedby the Presidential Decree for SDGs achievement in Indonesia. This Presidential Decree regulates the institutional arrangement; implementation strategy for SDGs goals and targets in Indonesia; monitoring, evaluation, and reporting; financing; and coordination between national and sub-national governments. Institutional aspect is outlined also in the Presidential Decree, the aforementioned section of institutional arrangement describing the roles and positions of both government representatives and non-state actor representatives. This coherent coordination is based on the principle of inclusivity and no-one left behind, and is applied at both the national and sub-national levels.  
     Within one year of the implementation of SDGs in Indonesia, a legal basis and mapping of alignment of SDGs targets with the RPJMN 2015-2019 have been prepared. This reflects an effective alignment between the global development agenda with Indonesiais national development plan, which has been established, not only at the national level but also at the sub-national levels, for example, in Riau Province. 
     Coherent coordination, through multi-stakeholders involvement, has been applied, among others, in the process of developingSDGs Indonesia indicators, as well as formulating guidelines for metadata and for the preparation of action plans. Coherent coordination between the government and non-state actors is still facing the challenge of establishing synergy between the programs of the government and non-state actors.  
Multistakeholder partnership to achieve SDGs at the national level is built 

     Another challenge is the development of alternative SDGs financing mechanisms at both the national and sub-national levels, so that SDGs financing does not rely solely on State Budget (Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara/APBN) and Regional Government Budget (Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Daerah/APBD) or International Development Loans. In this regard, alternative SDGs financing can be advanced through cooperation with the private sector, philanthropists, and development partners. 
 
	4.5 	CAPACITY BUILDING 
     Since 2016, efforts have been focused on providing capacity building for all actors to implement SDGs. Ministry of National Development 
Capacity building for all Planning/Bappenas as the coordinator for SDGs implementation in Indonesia stakeholders of have conducted capacity building activities in the forms of: disseminating SDGs SDGs is to all stakeholders, training on mainstreaming SDGs in development plans, focusedon main- training on development of SDGs indicators, and training on action plan streaming, formulation. 
indicators 
development and Dissemination of SDGS have been conducted in 31 provinces and more action plan than 50 districts/cities, using format of seminar or direct consultation. Ministry formulation of National Development Planning also actively provides dissemination to non government organizations on request. Disseminations have been given to universities, some civil society organizations and parliaments members.   
     Training on SDGs mainstreaming have been given to provinces and districts/municipalities that are in the process of formulating their next mid-term development plans. Trainings are conducted using workshop and direct exercise to government officials. Mainstreaming is conducted through mapping exercise of national SDGs targets and regions development priorities and through direct consultations process. 
     DKI Jakarta and Riau provinces and Gresik district are local governments that have conducted SDGs workshops. As part of the training for indicator development, some regions, e.g. Riau Province, have started to develop their 
SDGs indicators that reflect regionsi priorities. 
     In the formulation of action plans, all platforms members are required to share their development programs and activities. For that purpose, a program matrix has been developed as a basis to measure the achievements of SDGs in Indonesia. Exercise to fill in the matrix have been conducted involving all platforms to ensure their understanding ability to do it. Philanthropy and Business platform have requested Ministry of National Development Planning to facilitate initial training on how to fill in the matrix. 
 
     
Indonesia is committed to regularly monitor SDGs achievement, engage young generation, and work with the global community to enhance the achievement of SDGs  
5 CHAPTER 5 n NEXT STEPS 
 
 
    For Indonesia, the implementation of SDGs means implementing its own national development program, since SDGs are in line with the vision and mission of the President (\0xECNawacita) and the 2015-2019 RPJMN. Most of the SDGs targets are aligned with national targets and therefore the required resources are secured. The remaining SDGs targets that have not been integrated in the RPJMN 2015-2019 but are relevant to the national development agenda will be developed in the national action plan. One of the main contributions of SDGs for Indonesia is to sharpen indicators of development achievement that are measurable and to ensure that development benefits all. SDGs also strengthen inclusive development process through the involvement of stakeholders, including synergizing with international development partners. 
    Indonesia is committed to regularly monitor SDGs achievements and conduct continuous improvements. Indonesia is open to share its SDGs mainstreaming experiences into national development, which has taken an inclusive process involving all stakeholders in all phases and in institutional arrangements with the support of the SDGs Secretariat. Indonesia is also keen to learn from other countriesi experiences on SDGs implementation. 
    Indonesia is committed to implement SDGs to achieve a prosperous and just Indonesia, in accordance with its national development goals. SDGs have provided meaningful contributions as the reference for sustainable development that is universally followed by developing and developed countries. Considering that Indonesia is the fourth largest populous country, the success of Indonesian development will contribute to the global welfare. 17.00% of Indonesiais population is within the range of 15-24 years of age (2016), and Indonesia has thus the opportunity to benefit from the \0xEBdemographic bonusi in 2020-2040. Youth is therefore a great potential and investment for the sustainable development, and their involvement in the SDGs implementation process, either as beneficiary or as agents of change is very important.  
    In the process of achieving sustainable development, Indonesia is in the stage of initiating the implementation of "Circular Economy" by optimally improving resource efficiency and reducing waste. In the future, Indonesia will develop policies to encourage circular economy that ensures Sustainable Consumption and Production (SCP) is implemented in the business cycles and business processes. The challenges of the SCP are effective implementation of the policies, which requires the changing of communitiesi behavior towards sustainable consumption and production. 
     Indonesiais challenge to achieve SDGs is enormous, in particular to ensure that no one will be left behind for its 258 million people, spread over 17 thousand islands, with vast differences in cultures, ethnics, religions and languages. However, the enormous challenge is not a source of concern for the Government of Indonesia, who is remain confident in its efforts. The challenge will be addressed to ensure sustainable development to improve welfare and provide justice for all. Indonesia is also open and willing to cooperate with the global community toward the achievement of SDGs. 
 
     
6 CHAPTER 6 n CONCLUSION 
 
 
     Preparation and implementation of SDGs in Indonesia  usesdevelopment planning approach. Indonesia long-term vision, Nawacita, has been incorporated into the National Medium-Term Development Plan (RPJMN) 2015-2019. Since Nawacita, RPJMN and SDGs have been aligned, SDGs implementations have been included in the ministerial programs with budget allocations and resources, while supported by non-state actors. For Indonesia, achieving SDGs means implementing national development and to contribute to the global SDGs achievements. SDGs amplify key priorities of national development agenda in three dimensions: social, economics and environment and are supported by justice and good governance.  
     Indonesia has participated actively in promoting multi-stakeholders partnerships approach in the preparation and implementation of SDGs at global and national level since Post-2015 Agenda process. Various stakeholders, represented by 4 (four) platforms of state and non-state actors, have been involved since the beginning of SDGs roll-out during the process of policy and program formulation, indicators development, data and information preparation, dissemination and advocacy, budget and regulations support, as well as monitoring, evaluation and reporting.  
     The Indonesian government is committedto ensure the involvement of all stakeholders in SDGs implementation in Indonesia. The formulation of Presidential Decree for SDGs implementation regarding National Coordination Team (NCT) reflects the highest commitment from the Government to build sense of ownership from all platforms and to ensure an inclusive SDGs process. The President, as the Chair of Steering Committee, will directly lead the involvement of non-state actors in the NCT.  
     The preparation process of Indonesia VNR applied the principle of \0xECinclusive and participatory by involving the 4 platforms through series of meetings and online/offline consultations. Analysis of interconnectedness across goals, target and indicators to achieve SDGs are conducted to ensure VNR report is in line with the theme for 2017.  
     Indonesia VNR report focus on two main aspects: (1) Improvement of human resource quality, and (2) Leveraging economic opportunity for sustainable livelihood. The former focuses on achievement in health, food security, sustainable agriculture and education, while the latter focuses on industrial development, innovation, infrastructure, and protection and sustainable use of marine and coastal ecosystem.  Both aspects will be achieved if the supporting factors, justice; gender equality; multi-stakeholders partnerships; quality of data; and funding, are in place. 
     For the last 10 years, indicators from various goals and target in the 2017 VNR showed various progresses. Poverty rate in Indonesia has been reduced from 17.75% (2006) to 10.86% (2016). The decreasing rate is due to poverty alleviation program including social protection scheme and improved access to basic services. The former is conducted through Family Hope Programme (PKH), Non-Cash Food Program (BPNT) and National Social Security System (SJSN) for health and manpower. The latter is implemented through maternal and child health services, birth certificate issuance, access to primary and secondary education, access to adequate water and sanitation, quality improvement of urban housing, and access to electricity, and disaster resilience.   
     The implementation of SDGs faces many challenges. To overcome those challenges, efforts are made on integrated data management, spearheading poverty alleviation program, budget effectiveness to accelerate poverty reduction, strengthening coordination mechanism of poverty alleviation programs by establishing National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K) and promoting self-reliance for poor community.   
     Food situation in Indonesia has improved. This is reflected by the decreasing of proportion of population with minimum calory consumption under 
1400 kcal/capita/day and improved peopleis food quality shown by Desirable Dietary Pattern (PPH) score, positive agriculture productivity growth, and development of high-yielding variety for agriculture and livestock.     
     Indonesiais nutrition status has shown progress, indicated by decreasing wasting prevalence, and improved coverage of exclusive breastfeeding. However, prevalence of anemia in pregnant mother and prevalence of underfive and under-two stunting are still high. Some improvement programs have been introduced, including nutrition improvement focus on first 1000 days of life, strategic policy of food and nutrition, issuance of government regulation for exclusive breastfeeding, Indonesia participation in Scaling-Up Nutrition (SUN) movement, Indonesia food reserve policy, assignment to Logistic Agency (BULOG) to maintain availability and stability of food prices, and rural community empowerment.  
     Community health status shows some progress. In the area of maternal and child health, there has been a decrease in maternal mortality rate (although the proportion is still considerably high), decrease of infant, under-five and neonatal mortality rates, and improvement of immunization coverage (IDL) for children. Health status is improving. The prevalence of TB, leprocy, filariasis and malaria is significantly declining, but prevalence of HIV/AIDS is still high. The prevalence of non-communicable diseases is rising as indicated by high prevalence of hypertension, diabetes, and obesity. Risk factor of noncommunicable diseases is increasing as people tend to do more risky behaviour like smoking, alcohol consumption, lack of physical exercises and imbalance nutrition. Peopleis protection from health-related financial risk is decreasing following the increase of JKN coverage.   
     The availability of health workers in health service facilities is increasing, but there is unequal distribution across regions. Availability of medicines and vaccines in primary health services is improved. These were due to the implementation of minimum standard requirement and National Social Security System (SJSN) in health, mandatory service for health workers, implementation of e-catalogue for medicine and medical equipment, and the application of family-based approach health services.  
     Gender equity and equality in Indonesia have shown significant progress with some challenges remain. Improvement is indicated by the issuance of various regulation to realize gender equality, decrease prevalence of child marriage, increase in median age of first marriage; decrease in Age Specific Fertility Rate (ASFR), increase of gross enrollment ratio for primary and secondary education, increase of female proportion at managerial position, decrease unmet need for family planning, improved knowledge and understanding Couple Age Fertile (PUS) about modern contraception method. 
Number of female representation at the parliament is improving, however for sub-national representations the figure varies among provinces.  Those achievements are due to innovation in gender mainstreaming through Gender Responsive Planning and Budgeting (PPRG), harmonization of regulations regarding child age, capacity building for female representation from political party, female parliament members and selected female head of regions. 
     Challenges remain on violence against women by spouse and non-spouse. To prevent that, a violence prevalence database has been developed through the implementation of National Womenis Life Experience Survei (SPHPN), improving communication, information and education activities, improving service capacity and quality of Integrated Service Center for Women and Children Empowerment (P2TP2A) and development of reporting mechanism that is accessible by the victim of violence.  
     Infrastructure and industrial development has open the economic opportunity for sustainable livelihood. Vast development of infrastructure has been demonstrated by accelerating the development of toll roads, railways, port and airports, particularly in eastern part of Indonesia in order to reduce poverty and inequality.  Priority is also given for infrastructure development in remote, forefront and outer regions. Infrastructure development supports industrial development with focus on labor-intensive and local resource-based industries. Industry sector is the main contributor to GDP followed by the agriculture sector. Challenge remains on budget constraints. The government is currently exploring possible solutions including public-private partnerships, alternative financing scheme using Non-Annual State Budget Investment Financing (PINA), and Infrastructure Financing Insurance Corporation. Pro-poor industrial development is realized through agriculture-based, local resource-based and labour intensive industries. 
     Indonesia has enormous marine resources that can be utilized for the poverty reduction and improvement of community welfare. Conservation and sustainable use of marine resources has been conducted through various regulations, in the form of Act, Presidential Decree, the regulation of Ministry of Marine and Fisheries Affairs, as well as from its Directorate General. The total production of fishing, marine protected areas and access to finance for small-scale fishermen have increased. The progress is supported by the improvement of maximum sustainable yieldis estimation, combating of IUU fishing, sustainable management of fisheries management area, improvement of MPA institution and facilities, regulation for small-scale fishermen protection, and increased access to finance and its technical regulations. Challenges in the utilization of fisheries and marine resources include management in some of MPAs, and lack of proper utilization of financial assistance for small-scale fishermen. 
     The main topic raised in Goal 17 is South-South and Triangular Cooperation (SSTC) as well as data and statistics. Indonesia is committed to enhance the role of SSTC, indicated by an increasing number of activities, amount of resources and number of participants. The SSTC implementation also aims to support the poverty reduction in a wider context, both in Indonesia and other developing countries. Some significant achievements are reached through improving the coordination for implementing activities facilitated by the formation of National Coordination Team, as well as the involvement of academics, community organizations and private sector in SSTC. Challenges faced include lack of coordination among various Ministries/Institutions, inaccurate calculations of budget allocations, lack of evaluation mechanisms, limited funding sources, and the need to enhance Indonesia's strategic role on SDGs implementation. Some efforts to overcome challenges are made by developing SOPs, incorporating SSTC activities as one thematic budgets, and encourage partnerships with various stakeholders to improve financial resources. Achievements in data and statistics are shown by the improved quality, service and the use of BPS-Statistics Indonesia data. The challenges faced include the provision of data disaggregation, decentralization, lack of ICTs utilization, and the unavailability of some global indicators data of SDGs. Therefore, Indonesia has reviewed existing surveys to disaggregate data down to district level, developed a one-stop data mechanism and Indonesian SDGs metadata. 
     Indonesia has the means of implementation that have been prepared to support the achievement of SDGs. Efforts include strengthening domestic resource mobilization, expanding the use of technologies including ICT for development, multi-stakeholders partnership, coherent coordination, and capacity building. Furthermore, Indonesia is committed to monitor the achievements of SDGs, implement sustainable development, engage youth, and work with global community to achieve SDGs. 
     Based on experience in formulating VNR 2017 guided by the official technical guideline, some unnecessary repetition were found, including opening statement, summary, thematic analysis and conclusion. Therefore, it is recommended that VNR outline for the coming years should be more streamlined, so that VNR report can be more concise. Furthermore, by taking into account the experience of writing the MDGs report, it can be considered the comparison between the targets and achievements that can be compared between countries. To support the achievement of the SDGs targets a discussion forum is needed to exchange experience and regional knowledge to initiate discussions at a global level. 
 
     
7 STATISTICAL ANNEX 
 
 
GOAL 1. END POVERTY IN ALL ITS FORMS EVERYWHERE 

Figure 1. Trend of Poverty Incidence by Province  
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia (September 2016) 
 
 
Table 1.Indicator of Access to Basic Services  
No. 
Indicator 
Year 


2015 
2016 
1 
Contraceptive prevalence rate of all methods among married couples and fertile-age in bottom 40% of population  by income 
64.53 
64.28 
2 
Percentage of households with access to clean water services in bottom 40% of population by income 
61.57 
61.94 
3 
Percentage of households with access to decent sanitation facilities in bottom 40% of population by income 
47.76 
54.12 
4 
Percentage of households with access to urban slum households in bottom 40% of population by income 
12.60 
10.53 
5 
Percentage of the poor and vulnerable households that have access to electricity from National Electricity Company (PLN) and Non-PLN 
95.74 
96.22 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia 
  
Table 2.Indicator of Basic Services to Disaster Victims 
Indicator 
Year 

2010 
2014 
Basic Services to Natural Disaster Victims 

Natural Disaster Victims that Assisted and Aided (person) 
66,625
 200,000
Training for Disaster Pioneer Staff (person) 
5,310
 	5,740
Basic Services to Social Disaster Victims 

Emergency Services and Social Recovery (person) 
6,700
 	20,569
Formation and Training for Disaster Management Team 
100
 	295
Source: Ministry of Social Affairs (Annual Report) 
 
GOAL 5. ACHIEVE GENDER EQUALITY AND EMPOWER ALL WOMEN AND GIRLS 
 
Table 3.Proportion of Individuals Who Own a Mobile Telephone by Sex 
Indicator  

Year 



2015 

2016 
Proportion of Individuals Who Own a Mobile Telephone by Sex in Indonesia 
Men 
Women 
Men 
Women 

63.4 
50.4 
64.4 
52.1 
Source: BPS-Statistics Indonesia, Susenas 2015-2016 
 
GOAL 9. BUILD RESILIENT INFRASTRUCTURE, PROMOTE INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE INDUSTRIALIZATION AND FOSTER INNOVATION 
 
Table 4. Toll Road Development Indicator  
Indicator  

Year 



2014 

Length of Toll Road (km) 
Operate 
The Toll Road 
Undertaking 
(PPJT) 
In Tender Process 
  Tender Preparation 

949 
905.15 
40.57 
233.84 
Sourcer: Statistics Information Book of Public Works and Public Housing (2015) 
 
 
Table 5. The Number of Airports Indicator Based on Hierarchy 
Indicator  
Year 


2014 

Number of Airport 
Primary-scale 
Secondary-scale 
Tertiary-scale 
Feeder 

10 
17 
39 
173 
Source: Statistic of Air Transportation , BPS-Statistic Indonesia (2015) 
 
 
 	 
GOAL 14. CONSERVE AND SUSTAINABLY USE THE OCEANS, SEAS AND MARINE RESOURCES FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Table 6.Potention and production of fisheries catches, as well as fish catches that are in biological safe in 2008-2014 
 
2008 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
Maximum Sustainable 
Yield of fish resources, (ton) 
6,400,000  
6,520,100 
6,520,100 
6,520,100 
7,305,699 
Total Allowable Catch, (ton) 
5,120,000 
5,216,080 
5,216,080 
5,216,080 
5,844,559 
Production of marine fisheries catches (ton) 
3,982,783 
4,803,462 
4,881,809  
5,111,572 
5,349,960 
Propotion of fish catches 
that are in biological safe (%) 
91.83%  
92.09% 
93.59% 
98.00% 
91.54% 
Source: MDGs 15 Years Report 
 
GOAL 17,STRENGTHEN THE MEANS OF IMPLEMENTATION AND REVITALIZE THE GLOBAL PARTNERSHIP FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 
 
Table 	7.Number 	of 	Statisticians 	and 	Computer 	Scientists 	in 	Indonesian 
Ministries/Institutions, 2016 
Nu. 
Name of Institution 
Number of 


Computer 
Scientist 
Statistications  
1. 
Central Bureau Statistics n Statistics Indonesia 
33 
3,672 
2. 
Ministry of Home affairs 
21 
- 
3. 
Ministry of Defense 
41 
- 
4. 
Ministry of Religious Affairs 
105 
4 
5. 
Ministry of Law and Human Right  
23 
- 
6. 
Ministry of Finance 
302 
- 
7. 
Ministry of Research, Technology and Higher Education 
38 
- 
8. 
Ministry of Health 
56 
1 
9. 
Ministry of Social Services 
32 
- 
10. 
Ministry Of Manpower 
43 
- 
11. 
Ministry of Industry 
10 
- 
12. 
Ministry of Trade 
26 
1 
13. 
Ministryof Energy and Mineral Resources  
15 
1 
14. 
State Ministry of Public Works and Public Housing  
23 
- 
15. 
Ministry of Transport  
62 
1 

Nu. 
Name of Institution 
Number of 


Computer 
Scientist 
Statistications  
16. 
Ministry of Communication and Informatics 
7 
1 
17. 
Ministry of Agriculture  
20 
13 
18. 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry  
49 
- 
19. 
Ministry of Marine Affairs And Fisheries  
4 
21 
20. 
Ministry of state Secretariat  
6 
- 
21. 
The National Archive of Indonesia 
22 
- 
22. 
State Civil Service Agency  
99 
2 
23. 
National Population and Family Planning Agency (BKKBN) 
39 
6 
24. 
Geospacial Information Agency 
(BAKOSURTANAL) 
5 
1 
25. 
National Disaster Management Authority (BNPB) 
12 
4 
26. 
National Authority for the Placement and Protection of Indonesian Overseas 
Workers (BNP2TKI) 
10 
- 
27. 
Financial and Development Supervisory Agency (BPKP 
66 
- 
28. 
Nuclear Energy Regulatory Agency (BAPETEN) 
1 
- 
29. 
National Agency of Drug and Food Control (BPOM)  
46 
- 
30. 
National Nuclear Enerty Agency (BATAN) 
16 
- 
31. 
Indonesian Institute of Sciences (LIPI) 
15 
- 
32. 
National Resilience Institute 
6 
- 
33. 
National Aeronautics and Space 
Agency (LAPAN) 
10 
- 
34. 
National Library of Indonesia  
5 
- 
35. 
National  Search and Rescue Agency 
10 
- 
36. 
National Commision of Human Right  
3 
- 
37. 
Supreme Court 
14 
- 
38. 
Constitutional Court 
10 
- 
39. 
Secretariat General of DPR 
18 
- 
	Total 	1,323 	3,728 

 