 
 
Key messages 
 
Lessons learnt  
 
\0xEF Prioritisation is key: Zimbabwe has committed itself to implementing all the SDGs with an emphasis on SDGs 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 17. This will enable Zimbabwe to achieve greater development outcomes considering of the imperatives on the ground.  
\0xEF Integration and alignment are essential for effective implementation: Mainstreaming SDGs into national development plans and budgets ensures implementation. Plans are in place to strengthen the capacities of sub-national authorities to align strategies and policies at that level to achieve the SDGs. 
\0xEF Parliament plays a vital role in domestication and ownership: Extensive consultations with parliamentarians led to the establishment of a Parliamentary Thematic Committee on SDGs represented by all Chairs of portfolio committees. Such processes will enable actions towards enabling legislation, appropriation, oversight and monitoring of the SDGs. 
\0xEF Targeted specific interventions can pay hefty dividends: The recent initiative on special programme on maize production for import substitution (command agriculture) including targeted input subsidy provision, has strengthened resilience to economic and climate-induced shocks. 
\0xEF Strong partnerships are essential to progress on the SDGs: In view of the comprehensive nature of the SDGs, strong partnerships play a vital role in SDG implementation. The donor community provided support to the tune of $800 million in 2016 somewhat easing the tight fiscal situation in the country.  
 
Institutional framework  
 
Government has put in place a clear and robust institutional framework to guide the implementation of the SDGs in Zimbabwe consisting of:  
 
\0xEF A Steering Committee, chaired by the Chief Secretary to the President and Cabinet and represented by all line ministry Permanent Secretaries and the heads of the UN agencies, to provide overall guidance and strategic leadership to the process.  
\0xEF A Technical Committee, chaired by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Macroeconomic Planning and Investment Promotion, and represented by SDG focal persons from line ministries and representatives from UN agencies, development partners, the private sector, civil society and the Office of the President and Cabinet, to spearhead the coordination, technical processes as well as providing technical back-stopping. 
\0xEF Thematic clusters for mainstreaming and localising the SDGs. 
\0xEF A monitoring and evaluation policy including prioritised SDGs targets and indicators. 
\0xEF Coordination mechanism led by the Ministry of Macroeconomic Planning and Investment Promotion under the guidance and supervision of OPC, for SDG implementation.  
 
 
Successes and status 
 
SDG 1: No Poverty: Government has prioritised ending poverty. Some of the initiatives that Government has taken to address poverty include: 
  
\0xEF Launch of an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP) in September 2016 as part of Governmentis international re-engagement efforts, and to eradicate poverty and ensure inclusive growth.  
\0xEF Launch of the National Social Protection Policy Framework (NSPPF) in December 2016 which seeks to strengthen mechanisms for reducing poverty and vulnerability by improving the coverage and effectiveness of the various social protection programmes in place.  
\0xEF The Revised National Gender Policy (2017) under the thematic area on Gender and Economic Empowerment provides for strategies to strengthen womenis access to economic opportunities and to the benefits derived from the economic development of the country. 
 
The trends on key indicators show that: 
 
\0xEF Zimbabweis multidimensional poverty index (MPI) declined from 0.172 in 2011 to 
0.127 in 2014.  
\0xEF The percentage of people who are MPI poor declined significantly from 39.1 per cent in 2011 to 29.7 per cent in 2014. 
\0xEF Of the 6.3 million children in Zimbabwe, 78 per cent (4.8million) live in consumption poverty and 26 per cent (1.6 million) live in extreme/food poverty.               
 
While, the El Nino-induced drought and subsequent floods might have aggravated the poverty situation, a good harvest in the last season may have helped mitigate some of these adverse effects.  
 
SDG 2: Zero Hunger: Zimbabwe has a strong policy environment for achieving food security and improved nutrition, and has prioritised ending hunger within its overall development agenda. The government with support from the UN recently introduced the zero-hunger strategy. Interventions in the agricultural sector have been aligned to the principles of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP). Developments on key indicators include: 
 
\0xEF A sharp increase in the Global Hunger Index (GHI) score, due to erratic rainfall and drought, from 16.5 in 2014 to 30.8 in 2015 but a subsequent decline to 28.8 in 2016.  
\0xEF A decline in prevalence of stunting in children under 5 years from 32 per cent in 2010/11 to 27 percent in 2015).  
\0xEF Projection of a surplus production of cereals and other food crops, against a national food requirement due to favourable weather.  
 
SDG 3: Zimbabwe has made positive efforts to create an enabling policy environment to improve public health. Some of these initiatives include: 
\0xEF Provision for the right to health under Section 76 of the Constitution.  
\0xEF Government developed the National Health Strategy for Zimbabwe 2016-2020 which seeks to achieve \0xEBEquity and Quality in Health: Leaving no one behind.i  
\0xEF A robust HIV/AIDS response strategy. Zimbabwe has also pioneered innovative approaches including mobilising of domestic resources through the AIDS levy to ensure sustainability. This is being supplemented by donor support to the health sector through the Health Development Fund and the Global Fund which secured over $400 million for HIV related interventions.  
 
Of concern is the unavailability of current comprehensive data on the burden of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) and their risk factors due to failure by the country to conduct the recommended WHO NCD STEPWISE survey and this has impacted negatively on any meaningful NCD programming. Notwithstanding, Zimbabwe has made significant progress in the health front including: 
\0xEF Drop in HIV prevalence to 14 per cent in 2016 (Female at 16.6 per cent; Male at 11.2 per cent) from 18 per cent in 2005/06.  
\0xEF Decline in under-5 mortality rate from 84 per 1,000 live births in 2010/11 to 69 per 1,000 live births in 2015. Infant mortality dropped from 57 per 1000 live births in 2010/11 to 50 per 1,000 live births in 2015. 
\0xEF Coverage for all basic vaccinations among children age 12-23 months in Zimbabwe was 76 per cent in 2015 up from 65 per cent in 2010-11. 
\0xEF A decline of maternal mortality ratio (MMR) estimated at 651 deaths per 100,000 live births during the 7-year period before the 2015 survey representing a decline from 960 deaths per 100,000 live births during the 7-year period preceding the 201011 survey. 
 
SDG 5: Government is committed to the achievement of gender equality and women empowerment and the Constitution provides a robust legal framework for the promotion of SGD 5. Several policies and institutions have been put in place to actualise these provisions, for instance: 
\0xEF The National Gender Policy (NGP) (2017) seeks to achieve a gender just society where men and women enjoy equality and participate as equal partners in the development process of the country.  
\0xEF The Zimbabwe Gender Commission (ZGC) seeks to ensure gender equality as provided for in the Constitution.  
\0xEF Zimbabwe is one of the few countries that has come up with a special electoral quota system to increase womenis representation in Parliament to at least 30 per cent.  
\0xEF The Constitutional Court in 2016 passed a judgement outlawing marriage of persons below the age of 18. This is a landmark ruling that will advance child rights in Zimbabwe by helping to end the harmful and prevalent practice of marrying children, especially girls. The ruling not only upholds the Constitution but also reaffirms Zimbabweis commitment to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. 
\0xEF In 2016, Zimbabwe developed the National Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Gender Equality and Women Empowerment to improve accountability and implementation of gender equality and women empowerment commitments in Zimbabwe. 
The following key milestones have been achieved. 
\0xEF The country has achieved near gender parity in key indicators of educational attainment.  
\0xEF The representation of women in the senate increased from 23.2 per cent in 2012 to 47.5 per cent in 2017 and from 16 per cent in 2012 to 32.6 per cent in 2017 in the National Assembly.  
 
SDG 9: Well-developed infrastructure is crucial for a well-functioning society and competitive industrial sector. Building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and fostering innovation are firmly placed at the centre of the Governmentis program. Major infrastructure projects have been launched in the areas of utilities, transportation and connectivity, and industrial zones. Some of the key initiatives include: 
 
\0xEF Rehabilitation of water and sewerage infrastructure in several urban centres. Among them are the Urgent Water Supply and Sanitation Rehabilitation Project Phase 1 in Mutare, Masvingo, Kwekwe, Chegutu, Harare, and Chitungwiza.  
\0xEF Expansion of the Kariba South power station. Emergency Power Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project to rehabilitate power transmission and distribution systems as well as the rehabilitation of the Ash plant at Hwange thermal power station.  
\0xEF Upgrading of Victoria Falls Airport to cater for wide body aircraft with an expanded runway. 
\0xEF The completion of the Tokwe Mukosi dam is a major achievement with the Tokwe Mukosi dam now the countryis largest inland dam. This development is expected to promote the agricultural and tourism sectors. The dam also has the capacity to generate hydro-electricity and there is provision for the construction of a 15 MW power plant. 
\0xEF The government has commissioned the dualisation project of the Beitbridge-Harare highway.  
 
Challenges 
 
Despite the above achievements, the country is facing several challenges in terms of implementing the SDGs. These include: 
 
\0xEF Limited fiscal space, with the bulk of fiscal revenues going towards funding recurrent expenditures. This is exacerbated by high indebtedness. 
\0xEF The increase in the urban population and the rising informal economy which has led to several challenges including: rising incidence of urban poverty; inadequate housing; inadequate provision of services; and environmental degradation and pollution.  
\0xEF The negative impact of relatively low per capita allocations on enablers such as health and education.   
\0xEF Gaps in terms of policy implementation and coherence.  
\0xEF Insufficient timely and disaggregated data for most indicators, making it difficult to track and monitor progress. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
Zimbabwe has fully committed itself to the Agenda 2030. Sustainable development is a core constitutional imperative and an overall strategic objective for the country. The Constitution guarantees political, civil, economic, social and cultural rights for all citizens. These rights are clearly articulated and provided for in the Bill of Rights and are justiciable. Moreover, Chapter 12 initiatives on oversight bodies including the National Peace and Reconciliation Commission, Anti-corruption Commission, Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission, Gender Commission and the Universal Periodic Review on Human Rights have put a stronger foundation for building an inclusive and peaceful society for sustainable development. 
 
The SDGs are being implemented within the context of an economic recovery following the El Nino-induced drought of 2015/16 which left over 4 million people food insecure-51 per cent of whom are women. Price instability especially during the lean season, compromises householdsi ability to access adequate food year-round through markets. The GDP growth rate declined from 1.1 per cent in 2015 to an estimated 0.6 per cent in 2016. It is however projected to increase to 3.8 per cent in 2017. This growth will be driven by the anticipated improvement in agriculture, manufacturing, mining, construction and financial sectors. Some of the key initiatives to support the economy include: 
 
\0xEF The special programme on maize production for import substitution (command agriculture) aimed at ensuring the country produces adequate grains to feed itself by giving identified farmers inputs, irrigation and mechanised equipment. 
\0xEF Strategic protectionist policy through the promulgation of Statutory Instrument 64 of 2016 to support the local industry. This intervention has resulted in capacity utilisation in local industry increasing significantly from 34.3 per cent in 2015 to 47.4 per cent in 2016.  
\0xEF Ease of doing business reforms being spearheaded by the Office of the President and Cabinet (OPC). The reforms are focusing on the 10 global indices of doing business as follows: Starting a Business; Protecting Minority Investors; Enforcing Contracts; Resolving Insolvency; Getting Credit; Paying Taxes; Trading Across Borders; Construction Permits; Registering Property; and Getting Electricity. 
\0xEF Government promulgated the Special Economic Zones Act in October 2016 to promote foreign direct investment inflows. Government has already designated 3 sites as special economic zones namely: Sunway City, Bulawayo Industrial Area and Victoria Falls.  
 
Reflecting its commitment to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Zimbabwe volunteered to undertake a national review of SDGs in 2017, along with 43 other countries, including 7 African countries. The voluntary national reviews (VNRs) seek to facilitate sharing of experiences, including successes, challenges, opportunities and lessons learnt with a view to accelerating the implementation of the 2030 Agenda. The process of VNR in Zimbabwe involved extensive consultations with government ministries, development agencies, private sector, unions and civil society organisations. The theme for the 2017 High Level Political Forum is \0xEBEradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world.i As such this report provides an in-depth review of SDGs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 17. We however also provide a brief overview of the other goals.  
2. Methodology and Process for Preparation of the Review 
 
The methodology adopted in the report preparation included: 
 
\0xEF A desk review of relevant policy documents and of the previous Zimbabwe MDG reports. This was complemented by a trend analysis for the indicators.  
\0xEF Interviews with key stakeholders representing government, development agencies, private sector, civil society organisations and youth groups provided useful and strategic insights and information. These consultative meetings helped to inculcate an inclusive and participatory approach to secure the buy-in of all relevant actors, which is key to advancing sustainable development efforts. They also helped to promote accountability and transparency. In particular, the National Association of Non-Governmental Organisations (NANGO) and the civil society reference group on SDGs dialogue provided invaluable inputs and insights from several civil society organisations.  
\0xEF The key messages and the draft report were subjected to review by the SDG technical committee and a broad stakeholder consultation. 
 
The main sources of data and information used in the report are: 
 
\0xEF The Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report by the Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency (ZIMSTAT). 
\0xEF The 2016 Understanding Gender Equality in Zimbabwe: Women and Men Report by ZIMSTAT. 
\0xEF The Zimbabwe Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP) 2016-2018. 
\0xEF The 2016 Zimbabwe United Nations Development Assistance Framework (ZUNDAF) Report. 
\0xEF The 2017 National Budget Statement.  
\0xEF The 2016 Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZimVac) Rural Livelihoods Assessment (RLA). 
\0xEF The ZimVAC 2017 Rapid Assessment. 
\0xEF The Zimbabwe Constitution. 
\0xEF National statistics provided by the ZIMSTAT and Institutional data and information from the various ministries.  
\0xEF ZIMASSET 2013-2018 
\0xEF 2015 MDGs Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Policy and Enabling Environment 
a. Creating Ownership of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
 
Coordination of the Agenda 2030 in Zimbabwe is being led by the Ministry of MacroEconomic Planning and Investment Promotion under the guidance and supervision of the 
Office of the President and Cabinet. Following the Global Launch of the Agenda 2030 in 2015, the Ministry of Macro-Economic Planning and Investment Promotion undertook and coordinated the consultative processes that culminated in the development of the Zimbabwe SDG Position Paper. In coming up with the position paper, Government undertook a wide consultation process which entailed multi-stakeholder workshops and several follow up meetings. The stakeholders included government departments, private sector, civil society, academia, people with disabilities, UN Agencies and other development partners. 
 
The first consultative multi-stakeholder national dialogue was held in May 2015. The objective was to engage in a comprehensive and inclusive national dialogue in order to build national consensus on the Post 2015 Sustainable Development Goals and chart a way forward. More specifically, the dialogue sought to:  
 
\0xEF Appraise national stakeholders on international and regional processes on Post 2015 Development Agenda. 
\0xEF Bring to the public domain and raise awareness on the proposed global 17 SDGs.  
\0xEF Begin the process of prioritising and domesticating the SDGs in relation to Zimbabweis development vision espoused in the Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation (ZIMASSET). 
 
As part of the consultation, the ZIMASSET Clusters and enabling clusters namely: Food 
Security and Nutrition; Value Addition and Beneficiation; Social Services and Poverty Reduction; Infrastructure and Utilities; Fiscal Reform Measures; Aid Coordination and Public Administration, Governance and Performance Management, were tasked with drawing the parallels between the SDGs and their respective areas of work to ensure that the SDGs are  mainstreamed into the implementation of the national development plan.  
 
A follow-up multi-stakeholder national dialogue was held in August 2015 to review the draft Zimbabwe National Position Paper on Sustainable Development Goals. The Zimbabwe SDG Position Paper seeks to: 
\0xEF Raise public awareness on the Agenda 2030. 
\0xEF Align policies and priorities to the SDGs framework. 
\0xEF Prioritise the SDGs targets and indicators in terms of implementation. 
\0xEF Lay a solid foundation for the implementation of SDGs in the country. 
 
Zimbabwe has committed itself to implementing all the SDGs with emphasis on the following 10 SDGs (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 17). The prioritisation exercise was guided by the countryis vision, the need to focus on enabling Goals, resource availability and unfinished business in the MDGs.  Listed below is the rationale used in coming up with the prioritisation of the SDGs. The SDGs are listed in order of priority. 
Goal 
Rationale 
8 
Economic Growth  : Sustained and inclusive  economic  growth is necessary if we are to create wealth which can be channeled to the social sectors, create economic opportunities for citizens to go into business or to become gainfully employed 
7 
Energy: Energy is critical for all sectors of the economy to be fully functional and productive. 
 
2 
Agriculture, Food Security and Nutrition: Sustainable Agriculture is the bedrock of our Economy (agro-based economy) and the bulk of our population derive their livelihood from this sector. (Also important are the attendant food security and nutrition aspects). Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy as emphasized in ZIMASSET and the Ten Point Plan. 
 
9 
Infrastructure: Resilient infrastructure, Industrialization and Innovation are again key in promoting sustainable economic growth. ZIMASSET and the Ten Point Plan also emphasize on the importance of infrastructure development. 
 
6 
Water and Sanitation: Availability and sustainable management of Water and Sanitation are key in supporting all sectors of the economy. No sector can function without water, these are key enablers in the ZIMASSET and the Ten Point Plan. 
 
17 
Financing: Means of implementation and Revitalized Global Partnerships are key in the implementation of the Agenda 2030 since there is outright acknowledgement that domestically mobilized resources will not be enough to finance the SDG Agenda. Financing will require more stakeholders than Government alone. The country needs both foreign and domestic investment for it to grow. Private sector participation is critical in the Ten Point Plan. 
 
 
3 
Health: For the economy to grow it will require healthy people. The relationship between a healthy nation and economic growth is pivotal. Health is key in improving labor productivity and hence economic growth. 
 
4 
Education:  Quality education is key in imparting the necessary skills required in all sectors of the economy and enhancing labor productivity. 
 
13 
Combating Climate Change: The economy (including the anchor sector of Agriculture) depends on the Environment. There is therefore urgent need to combat climate change and its negative impact on the Environment. 
 
5 
Gender and Women Empowerment: The achievement of full human potential and sustainable development is not possible if one half of humanity continues to be denied its full potential in sustainable development. Economic Empowerment of women and girls is therefore imperative for them to participate in all sectors of the Economy. 
 
Zimbabwe also undertook a comprehensive campaign to raise awareness on SDGs and advocacy and capacity building. Key among them are: 
 
\0xEF An advocacy campaign involving parliamentarians that has been initiated to ensure an effective rollout of SDGs and successful mobilisation of constituencies. In this regard, a multi-stakeholder dialogue was held from 11 to 12 May 2016 in Harare. The dialogue, which involved 195 Members of Parliament, the Office of the President and Cabinet, the United Nations and Development Partners sought to enable legislators as representatives of the people to mobilize their constituencies around SDGs implementation. This led to the establishment of a Parliamentary Thematic Committee on SDGs with representation from all Chairs of portfolio committees. 
\0xEF A capacity building workshop on the institutionalization of SDGs with a focus on the role of Parliament through the oversight, legislative and representative functions in the implementation of SDGs was held on 24-25 June 2016 in Mutare for the Parliamentary Thematic Committee on SDGs.   
\0xEF Public awareness campaign on SDGs through mass media including live radio and TV programmes, engagement with youth, journalists, private sector, young entrepreneurs, university students and civil society. 
 
Zimbabwean civil society have been very proactive and well organized in terms of their engagement on the Agenda 2030. Interventions by civil society include:  
 
\0xEF The National Association of Non-Governmental Organisations (NANGO) is a member of the SDGs Steering Committee. NANGO has come up with 10 thematic sectors covering all the SDGs. These NANGO thematic sectors are part of the SDGs thematic clusters. In October 2016, a national dialogue on SDGs was organised by the NANGO to sensitise civil society organisations in Zimbabwe on the SDGs process. 
\0xEF Formation of a civil society organisations reference group on SDGs to coordinate the involvement of civil society on SDGs and to monitor the implementation of SDGs in Zimbabwe.  
\0xEF The establishment of a national youth taskforce on SDGs titled \0xEBYouth4SDGsi bringing together 100 youth organizations working in 10 provinces of Zimbabwe in 2016. The overall objective of the \0xEBYouth4SDGsi is to provide strategic direction for youth inclusion and participation in the implementation and monitoring of the SDGs in Zimbabwe. The Youth4SDGS also seeks to educate youth in rural, peri-urban, mining areas, farms and urban areas on the SDGs, their importance and link to policies and national development in Zimbabwe.  
\0xEF SDGs Lecture Series in Universities: To ensure the effective participation of tertiary students in SDGs the UN in Zimbabwe in collaboration with the Zimbabwe United Nations Association (ZUNA) launched the SDGs Lecture Series in Universities. The purpose of the series is to raise awareness and to encourage active engagement by providing the opportunity for students and the local academic community to engage with the UN or experts on SDGs of particular relevance to their respective universities and to Zimbabwe at large. To date, the lecture series has reached some 3,000 students and staff in different Universities. The UN in Zimbabwe also supported a training of trainers on SDGs for 120 young people to empower them to mobilise themselves and take up proactive initiatives towards achieving SDGs. 
 
b. Incorporation of the Sustainable Development Goals in National Frameworks 
 
SDGs are a core constitutional value and an overall strategic development imperative. The SDGs have already been mainstreamed and integrated into the ZIMASSET clusters for ease of implementation and to ensure synergies between the SDGs and the countryis economic blueprint, the ZIMASSET with 2015 being adapted as the base year. The SDGs have been incorporated into the existing ZIMASSET clusters and enabling clusters as follows:  
 
Cluster 
Assigned Goals 
 Value Addition and Beneficiation 
 
1,2,5,8,9 and 12 
 
Food Security and Nutrition  
 
1,2,5,8,13,14 and 15 
Infrastructure and Utilities 
 
1,5,6,7,8,9 and 11  
 
Social Services and Poverty Reduction 
 
3,4,5, 6 and 10 
Fiscal Reform measures 
 
8,10 and 17 
Public Administration and Governance 
 
5,7,8,10,11 and 16 
 
 
 
Some private sector entities have embraced sustainability as part of their businesses strategies and practices. The Zimbabwe Stock Exchange (ZSE) has voluntarily committed to participate in the UN Sustainable Stock Exchanges Initiative, a global forum for sharing best practices on sustainability and capital markets. As part of this commitment the ZSE will through proactive dialogue with investors, companies and regulators promote long-term sustainable investment and improved environmental, social and corporate governance disclosure and performance among companies listed on the ZSE. A number of companies such as INNSCOR Africa Limited, DAIRIBORD, Lafarge Cement Zimbabwe and ZIMPLATS have embraced sustainability in their business operations with economic, social and environmental considerations underpinning their strategic focus. These companies have adopted sustainability reporting to measure their performance in an integrated manner in accordance with the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) G4 guidelines. The GRI is an international independent organisation that assists businesses, governments and other organisations understand and communicate the impact of business on sustainability issues. GRI and the UN Global compact have initiated a process to shape the future of corporate reporting on SDGs. 
 
A strong partnership between government and development partners has been established through the Zimbabwe UN Development Assistance Framework (ZUNDAF). The onset of the implementation of the SDGs coincided with the first year of implementing the new ZUNDAF (2016 n 2020). The ZUNDAF (2016-2020) is supporting national development efforts in six result areas that are fully aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) namely: Social Services and Protection; Poverty Reduction and Value Addition; Food and Nutrition; Gender Equality; HIV and AIDS; and Public Administration and Governance. ZUNDAF presents a good opportunity to mainstream and align the SDGs with the national priorities.  
 
c. Integration of the Three Dimensions 
 
The 3 dimensions of sustainable development are integrated in the Constitution. The Constitution guarantees economic, social, environmental, political and civil rights. These rights are clearly articulated and provided for in the Bill of Rights and are justiciable. The Bill of Rights incorporates first, second and third generational rights.  First generational rights deals with the civil and political rights. Second generational rights include: freedom of profession, trade or occupation, labour rights, property rights, right to agricultural land, right to education, right to health care, Right to food and clean water, and marriage rights. Third generational rights include language, culture and environmental rights. Furthermore, employment creation, the opportunity to work, labour relations, food security, cultural values, education, shelter, health services, and social welfare are included in Chapter 2 under National Objectives.  
 
Sustainable development is consistent with the nationis development vision and is at the core of the nationis priorities. The countryis development plan the ZIMASSET is anchored on four main clusters: Food Security and Nutrition; Social Services and Poverty Eradication; Infrastructure and Utilities; and Value Addition and Beneficiation. These four clusters are supported by three enabling clusters namely: Fiscal Reform Measures; Public Administration, Governance and Performance Management; and Aid Coordination. The three dimensions of sustainable development have been integrated into these clusters. Sustainable development is also clearly integrated within the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP) launched in September 2016. The IPRSP is anchored on seven pillars namely: Agriculture Productivity, Growth and Rural Food Security; Social Sectors; Private Sector; Infrastructure; Environment and Climate Change; Gender Women and Youth Empowerment; and Strengthening Governance and Institutional Capacity. 
 
Furthermore, sustainable development has since long been at the heart of the African Union (AU) and the Southern African Development Community (SADC). Zimbabwe is implementing SDGs concurrently and in an integrated manner with the AUis Agenda 2063, SADCis Revised Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (RISDP) 2015-2020 and the SADC Industrialisation Strategy 2015-2063. The Agenda 2063 is a strategic framework for the socio-economic transformation of the African continent which builds on, and seeks to accelerate the implementation of past and existing continental initiatives for growth and sustainable development. Poverty eradication is the main objective of the Revised Regional Indicative Strategic Development Plan (RISDP) which is the regional framework that guides SADC in achieving its development objectives through sustainable economic growth and integration. The priorities for the RISDP are: 
 
\0xEF Trade/Economic liberalization and development. 
\0xEF Infrastructure in support of regional integration. 
\0xEF Peace and security cooperation (as a pre-requisite for achieving the regional integration agenda). 
\0xEF Special programmes of regional dimension, encompassing education and human resource development; health, HIV and AIDS and other communicable diseases; food security and transboundary natural resources; statistics; gender equality; science, technology and innovation; and research and development. 
 
Involving and coordinating the government departments as well as key stakeholders that are relevant has enabled the SDG process to have an integrated perspective helping to flag out any potential trade-offs. The challenge is now to ensure that the national budget is fully aligned to the SDGs so that resources can be allocated to the identified priorities. The country should take advantage of the medium term budgeting framework as a tool for integrating SDGs and enhancing coherence for sustainable development. 
 
The country has mapped and selected 244 country-specific indicators. The country has adopted 2015 as the baseline period and progress is underway in terms of coming up with baseline data for the indicators. 
 
d. Goals and Targets 
 
Owing to the unavailability of the up-to-date data on most of the indicators we use the latest data available where possible. 
 
Goal 1: End poverty in all its forms everywhere 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Government has always prioritised ending poverty and this is reflected in the countryis development plan. Other initiatives that Government has also taken to address poverty include: 
  
\0xEF Launch of an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP) in September 2016 as part of governmentis international reengagement efforts and to eradicate poverty and ensure inclusive growth. The IPRSP reflects the multi-dimensional nature of the SDGs. 
\0xEF Launch by Government of the National Social Protection Policy Framework (NSPPF) in December 2016 which seeks to strengthen mechanisms for reducing poverty and vulnerability by improving the coverage and effectiveness of the various social protection programmes in place.  
\0xEF The 2016-2020 Zimbabwe United Nations Development Assistance Framework (ZUNDAF) is aimed at promoting inclusive growth and sustainable development by supporting national development priorities as informed by the Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation (ZIMASSET) as well as advancing the achievement of the SDGs. ZUNDAF results which are linked to ZIMASSET and the SDGs are guided by six national priority areas, namely: 1. Food and Nutrition Security 2. Gender Equality 3. HIV and AIDS 4. Poverty Reduction and Value Addition 5. Public 
Administration and Governance 6. Social Services and Protection. In addition, the Government and the United Nations Country Team have integrated key cross-cutting issues. These issues are: Youth, Information and Communications Technology, Data, Resilience, Disaster Risk Management, Culture for Development, and Public Private Partnerships. The ZUNDAF also applies the five UN programming principles, of Capacity Development, Environmental Sustainability, Gender Equality, Human Rights-Based Approach, and Result-Based Management. These cross-cutting issues and principles strengthen the quality and focus of the UNis responses to national priorities based on the UN Systemis common values, standards and comparative advantages. 
\0xEF The launch in December 2016 of the third Phase of the National Action Plan for Orphans and Vulnerable Children (NAP3) by Government in partnership with Development Partners and UNICEF. At the heart of the NAP3 is the Harmonised Social Cash Transfer (HSCT) which is aimed at reducing extreme poverty in the most vulnerable households, thereby reducing poverty related abuse, neglect and violence against children.  
\0xEF The Revised National Gender Policy (2017) under the thematic area on Gender and Economic Empowerment provides for strategies to strengthen womenis access to economic opportunities and to the benefits derived from the economic development of the country. The policy is targeting key economic sectors and potential sources of growth particularly in mining, agriculture, tourism and manufacturing. The policy also proposes affirmative action measures to address economic empowerment imbalances in areas where sharp disparities exist. The strategies also target vulnerable groups such as women with disabilities, widows and children. 
\0xEF In 2016 the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) developed the Financial Inclusion Strategy which ensures that each bank has a special window for women and enhance womenis access to finance. 
\0xEF To further strengthen womenis access to finance, the Government of Zimbabwe has established a womenis Micro-Finance Bank. The objectives of establishing the Womenis Bank are to: 
* Improve access to affordable capital and operational finance by women. 
* Facilitate financial inclusion by decentralising the banking system so that it becomes accessible to the majority of women who reside in the rural or remote areas and are not formally employed and yet they carry out economic activities to earn a living. 
* The bank will also facilitate financial inclusion by decentralising the banking system so that it becomes accessible to the majority of women who reside in the rural or remote areas and are not formally employed and yet they carry out some small scale economic activities to earn a living. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
The trends on key indicators reveal that: 
 
\0xEF Zimbabweis multidimensional poverty index (MPI) which is published by the UNDP and Oxford University declined from 0.172 in 2011 to 0.127 in 2014.  
\0xEF The percentage of people who are MPI poor (also called the incidence or headcount ratio) declined significantly from 39.1 per cent in 2011 to 29.7 per cent in 2014. This 
is shown in Figure 1 and Table 1. The MPI is a recommended indicator for SDG Target 1.2 that seeks to \0xEBreduce at least half the proportion of men, women and children of all ages living in poverty in all its dimensionsi by 2030.  These positive developments show Zimbabweis progress in tackling extreme poverty and deprivation of its vulnerable populations.  
\0xEF Based on the international definition of poverty set at US$1.90 PPP per day, 21.4 per cent of the population where poor in 2011 while 45.5 per cent of the population were poor based on the US$3.10 PPP per day in 2011 (see Figure 1 and Table 1).  
\0xEF According to the 2011/12 Poverty Income Consumption and Expenditure Survey about 72.3 per cent of the population were deemed to be poor whereas 22.5 per cent were deemed to be extremely poor. On the other hand, 62.6 per cent of the households were deemed poor whilst 16.2 per cent were in extreme poverty. The rural households (76.0 per cent) were poor compared to 38.2 per cent in urban areas. Rural poverty was most prevalent in communal lands (79.4 per cent), followed by resettlement areas with 76.4 per cent. 
\0xEF Of the 6.3 million children in Zimbabwe, 78 per cent (4.8 million) live in consumption poverty and 26 per cent (1.6 million) live in extreme / food poverty. 
 
 

Source: Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI) Country Briefing December 2016. 
 
 
Table 1: Summary 
Multidimensional Poverty Index 
0.127 
Percentage of MPI Poor (H) 
29.70% 
Average Intensity Across the Poor (A) 
42.70% 
Percentage of Income Poor ($1.90 a day) 
21.40% 
Percentage of Income Poor ($3.10 a day) 
45.50% 
Percentage of Poor (National Poverty Line) 
72.30% 
Income Inequality (Gini index) 
43.20% 
	Source: OPHI Country Briefing December 2016. 	 
 
 
Challenges  
 
Zimbabwe continues to face formidable challenges in terms of: 
 
\0xEF Resolving issues of poverty owing to the decline in formal sector employment and the consequent informalisation of the economy. Endemic poverty afflicts the majority of youths and women in rural areas and in the informal economy where they work with little or no incomes. While, the El Nino-induced drought, subsequent floods might have aggravated the poverty situation, a good harvest in the last season (2016/17) helped mitigate some of these adverse effects.  
\0xEF The limited fiscal space. Government is working on the ease of doing business reforms that are expected to reduce the cost of doing business thereby improving investment inflows into the country. Government is also working on an arrears clearance strategy with the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) as part of the re-engagement process. In October 2016, Zimbabwe drew down on its Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) holdings held at the International Monetary Fund, to clear USD 107.9 million of arrears to the Fund's Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust. As a result, the IMF removed remedial measures applied to the country. The country still has arrears of about USD 601 million with the AfDB and USD 1.1 billion with the World Bank.  
 
Goal 2: End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Zimbabwe has a strong policy environment for achieving food security and improved nutrition and has prioritised ending hunger within its overall development agenda. This is demonstrated by the fact that the first cluster under the ZIMASSET clusters focusses on Food Security and Nutrition while Goal 2 is among the 10 priority Goals of the country, and the first pillar under the IPRSP focusses on Agriculture Productivity, Growth and Rural Food Security. This strategic thrust is anchored on a number of strategies and policies that include: 
 
\0xEF The Food and Nutrition Security Policy (FNSP) which was launched on 16 May 2013 seeks to \0xEBpromote and ensure adequate food and nutrition security for all people at all times in Zimbabwe, particularly amongst the most vulnerable and in line with our cultural norms and values and the concept of rebuilding and maintaining family dignity.i   
\0xEF The National Nutrition Strategy (NNS) 2014-2018 whose main objective is to implement the FNSP.  
\0xEF The draft Comprehensive Agriculture Policy Framework (2012-2032) which aims to stimulate growth in crop production and productivity and to enhance food security through improved technologies, better field-crop protection and reduction in postharvest losses.  
\0xEF The Zimbabwe Agricultural Investment Programme (ZAIP) (2013-2017) which is the shared national framework for coordinating public, private and development partnersi investment into the agriculture sector aimed at enhancing the realization of the objectives of the draft Comprehensive Agriculture Policy Framework (20122032), Food and Nutrition Security Policy (FNSP) (2012) and the ZIMASSET (2013 n 
2018). ZAIP is aligned to the principles of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) which include: investing in agriculture to promote economic growth and development, broad-based stakeholder participation, consultations, accountability and coordination. The investment planis business model is premised on Government allocating 10 per cent of the national budget towards agriculture to leverage private sector investment into the same in order to sustain an agriculture growth rate of 6 per cent per annum. 
\0xEF A Food and Nutrition Council (FNC) that was established as the multi-stakeholder platform to promote a multi-sectoral response to food and nutrition insecurity problems and ensure that every Zimbabwean is free from hunger and malnutrition. The FNC convenes and coordinates multi-sectoral technical committees that address specific food and nutrition security issues such as, the Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee (ZimVAC), Food and Nutrition Security Committees, the Food and Nutrition Security Advisory Group. The FNC also plays a watchdog role for food and nutrition security and alerts relevant authorities and stakeholders in food and nutrition security for appropriate action.  
\0xEF Zimbabwe is part of the Zero Hunger Challenge which is a national multilevel and multi-sector response to the global call to action made by the UN Secretary-General in 2012 towards a vision of a world without hunger. The Zero Hunger Challengeis vision is built upon a five pillars framework i.e.: (1) zero stunted children under two years; (2) 100 per cent, all-year round access to adequate food; (3) sustainable food systems; (4) increased smallholder productivity and incomes; and, (5) zero waste or food loss. Zimbabwe was the first country to come up with a Strategic Review process of the Zero Hunger Challenge. The Strategic Review process has helped to provide an overview of priority areas and measures to accelerate progress towards the five pillars of the Zero Hunger Challenge as well as initiating the development of a national Zero Hunger roadmap. 
\0xEF Government has set up the Standing Cabinet Committee on Food and Nutrition Security that is chaired by the Vice President.  
\0xEF At international level Zimbabwe has joined the Scaling Up Nutrition (SUN) Movement, a global multi-sectoral platform addressing nutrition security. SUN Zimbabwe networks include an array of participants from government, UN and donor agencies, civil society, academia, media and the business sectors among other, all focussed on the common goal of nutrition security. 
\0xEF In 2016 the government launched the special programme on maize production for import substitution (command agriculture scheme) aimed at ensuring the country produces adequate grains to feed the nation through availing  inputs, irrigation and mechanised equipment to identified farmers. 
\0xEF Government has also come up with a targeted command livestock scheme targeting producers of beef, dairy and poultry and the production of associated equipment.  
 
 
 
 
Status and Trends  
 
Developments on key indicators include: 
 	 
\0xEF Volatility in production trends of key selected crops over the period 2009 to 2017 reflecting the volatile climatic conditions and volatile rainfall. In particular, the country experienced an El Nino induced drought in 2015/16 which negatively affected production (see Table 2 and Figure 2).  
\0xEF The total area under maize production increased by 52 per cent from 1,161,997 hectares in 2015/2016 to 1,770,389 in 2016/2017. The agricultural sector is expected to grow by 12 per cent in 2017 with projections showing the country is poised to produce more than the national food requirement. This is expected to mitigate food insecurity. 
\0xEF Seasonal food insecurity continues to affect many rural communities. According to the 2016 ZimVac Rural Livelihoods Assessment (RLA) the 2015/16 and 2016/17 are projected to be the two poorest consumption years since 2009. During the first quarter for the 2016/17 consumption year, 987,000 people could not meet their annual food requirements which was an increase from last year when 151,000 people were estimated to be food insecure during the same period. The last quarter of the 2016/17 (January-March 2017) consumption year is projected to have a total of 4.1 million people without adequate means to meet their annual food requirements compared to about 3 million people during the same quarter in 2015/16.  The 2016/17 consumption year food insecurity prevalence is 40 per cent higher than that for the 2015/16 consumption year during the peak hunger period. 
\0xEF The ZimVAC 2017 Rapid Assessment conducted in January 2017 highlighted that households were still facing challenges in accessing food, mainly cereals and consequently recommended a 2- months extension of the lean season assistance i.e. until May 2017 when most households are expected to have started harvesting. The food insecurity situation is expected to improve starting in May, during the main harvest period. Despite favourable rainfall, areas in the southern part of the country are expecting below-normal cereal production due to flooding, crop input shortages, pests, and low cropped area.  
\0xEF The country experienced a sharp increase in the Global Hunger Index (GHI) score from 16.5 in 2014 to 30.8 in 2015 before declining to 28.8 in 2016.  This is attributable to the erratic rainfall and drought which put a downward pressure on food and livestock production (drought induced poor harvests). The GHI is a tool designed to comprehensively measure and track hunger globally, regionally and by country published annually by the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). Figure 3 shows the evolution in the Global Hunger Index for Zimbabwe over the period 2009 to 2016.  
\0xEF The nutritional status of children has progressively improved. Prevalence of stunting in children under 5 years was 27 per cent in 2015 (down from 32 per cent in 2010/11). The proportion of children who are underweight was 8 per cent in 2015 (down from 10 per cent in 2010/11). These trends are shown in Figure 4. 
 

Source: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) Global Food Policy Reports (various) 
 
 

Source: Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report. 
 
Challenges  
 
\0xEF Despite strong efforts by the government, food security concerns remain owing to the prevalence of poverty and recurrent climate-related disasters, exacerbated by one of the most devastating droughts in recent history.  
\0xEF The response to addressing the food security challenges as outlined in the available national policy and strategies is also facing some considerable challenges owing to inadequate resources as a result of the constrained fiscal space.  
\0xEF Climate change is a challenge for the agricultural sector. A lot still needs to be done in this sector, particularly in adopting climate smart agriculture, expanding agricultural extension services and rural infrastructure. To mitigate the impact of climate change the country has already adopted the National Climate Change Response Strategy. 
\0xEF Low uptake of water harvesting by farmers as a means of mitigating the effects of draught. 
 
Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Zimbabwe has made positive efforts to create an enabling policy environment to improve public health. Some of these initiatives include: 
 
\0xEF Provision for the right to health under Section 76 of the Constitution. Government developed the National Health Strategy for Zimbabwe 2016-2020 which seeks to achieve \0xEBEquity and Quality in Health: Leaving no one behind.i The Strategy is anchored by 4 priority areas namely: communicable diseases; non-communicable diseases (NCDs); reproductive, maternal, new-born, child and adolescents; and public health surveillance and disaster preparedness and response.  
\0xEF The accession to the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2015 and has enforced greater compliance with tobacco advertising laws.  
\0xEF A robust HIV/AIDS response strategy. Zimbabwe has also pioneered innovative approaches including mobilising of domestic resources through the AIDS levy to ensure sustainability. This is being augmented by donor support to the health sector through the Health Development Fund and the Global Fund which secured over $400 million for HIV related interventions. The Ministry of Health has adopted the national consolidated HIV guidelines in line with the 2015 World Health Organisation guidelines. This has resulted in the development of an HIV Prevention Revitalisation Roadmap to guide implementation of high impact HIV prevention interventions, particularly targeting hotspots and key populations.  
\0xEF In January 2017 Government introduced a health fund levy of 5 cents for every dollar of airtime and mobile data, under the theme, \0xEBTalk-Surf and Save a Life.i The financial resources mobilised are being ring-fenced for the purchase of drugs and equipment for public hospitals and clinics. 
\0xEF The Revised Gender Policy (2017) has a thematic area on Gender and Health. The policy recognise that gender inequality is responsible for most of the health issues. It further acknowledged that poor access to health services (particularly cancer management services), HIV and AIDS drugs, safe water and sanitation impacts negatively more on women than men and provide strategies to improve gender sensitivity in health service delivery 
 
Status and Trends 
 
Despite challenging economic conditions and dwindling allocations of the national budget to health (see Table 3), Zimbabwe has made significant progress in the health front including: 
 
\0xEF HIV prevalence has declined from 18 per cent in 2005-06 to 13.8 per cent in 2015 percent among women and men age 15-49. It is still higher among women at 16.7 
per cent as compared to men (10.5 per cent). HIV prevalence among young people aged 15-24 is also higher among young women (6.7 percent) compared to 2.9 percent. Owing to a combination of robust HIV prevention programmes that included social marketing, massive community mobilisation and awareness campaigns combined with HIV-counselling and testing, condom promotion and distribution, prevention of mother to child transmission and others, Zimbabwe has become a global example in HIV prevention.  
\0xEF The scale up of treatment services played a major part in lowering both the HIV prevalence and incidence. The Global Fund disbursed US$125 million during 2016. As at September 2016, close to a million people were provided with ART and nearly two million people were HIV tested, counselled and received their results (women accounting for 63 per cent of the coverage in each).  
\0xEF Decline in child mortality. Under-5 mortality rate declined from 84 per 1,000 live births in 2010/11 to 69 per 1,000 live births in 2015. Infant mortality dropped from 57 per 1000 live births in 2010/11 to 50 per 1,000 live births in 2015. The neonatal mortality declined from 31 per 1,000 live births in 2010/11 to 29 per 1,000 live births in 2015. These trends are shown in Figure 5. 
\0xEF Government has significantly scaled up vaccinations of children. Coverage for all basic vaccinations among children age 12-23 months in Zimbabwe was 76 per cent in 2015 up from 65 per cent in 2010-11 (see Figure 6). Female children are somewhat less likely to have received all basic vaccinations than male children (75 and 77 per cent, respectively). 
\0xEF A decline of maternal mortality ratio (MMR) estimated at 651 deaths per 100,000 live births during the 7-year period before the 2015 survey, this figure represents a decline from 960 deaths per 100,000 live births during the 7-year period preceding the 2010-11 survey. While this decline is positive and commendable, the ratio still remains unsustainably high (see Figure 7). The high ratio is attributable to a number of factors that include: refusal to use modern medicine in some communities owing to religious and traditional attitudes; delays in reaching health care facilities owing to poor public transport system in some areas; inadequate public health care financing; and human resource challenges. 
\0xEF Zimbabwe is one of the 22 countries designated by the WHO as the TB \0xEBhigh burdeni countries.  The 22 TB \0xEBhigh burdeni countries accounted for 83 per cent of all estimated incident cases of TB worldwide in 2014. Notwithstanding, the incidence of TB (per 100,000 population per year) has been on a declining trend as shown in Figure 8 in the annex. 
\0xEF There have been some notable improvements in life expectancy and adult mortality as shown in Tables 4, 5 and 6 in the annex. 
 

Source: Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report. 
 
 

Source: Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report. 
 
 

Source: Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report. 
 
Challenges  
 
The main challenges affecting the health delivery system include: 
 
\0xEF Inadequate domestic financing which has made the country dependent on external funding. 
\0xEF The unavailability of current comprehensive data on the burden of non-
communicable diseases (NCDs) and their risk factors due to failure by the country to conduct the recommended WHO NCD STEPWISE survey and has impacted negatively on any meaningful NCD programming. 
\0xEF Closing gaps in coverage and outcomes by eliminating huge income and urban/rural differentials in key health indicators. 
 
Goal 4: Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Since independence government has always prioritised investments in education. This is demonstrated by the fact that education gets the biggest share of the National Budget (see Table 7). The country has made positive efforts to create an enabling policy environment to improve public education. Some of these efforts include: 
 
\0xEF Provision for the right to education under Section 75 which entitles every citizen and permanent resident of Zimbabwe to a basic state-funded education, including adult basic education and further education, which the State, through reasonable legislative and other measures, must make progressively available and accessible. This is in line with Article 13 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). According to the Education Act of 1987, as amended in 
2006, \0xEBNo child in Zimbabwe shall be refused admission to any school or be discriminated against by the imposition of \0xD6. terms and conditions in regard to his admission to any school on the grounds of his race, tribe, place of origin, national or ethnic origin, political opinions, colour, creed or gender.i 
\0xEF In October 2014 the Ministry of Primary and Secondary Education undertook an updating curriculum review exercise. This review was informed by the recommendations of the Presidential Commission of Inquiry on Education and Training (CIET) in 1999. This process culminated in the development of the Zero Draft Curriculum Framework for Primary and Secondary Education to guide learning and teaching during the next seven years: 2015-2022. This New Curriculum Framework was approved by Cabinet on 22 September, 2015. The New Curriculum Framework is aimed at promoting and cherishing a national identity, preparing learners for life and work in a largely agro-based economy and an increasingly globalised and competitive environment, to foster life-long learning in line with the opportunities and challenges of the knowledge society. 
\0xEF In 2016 the government introduced the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) initiative. This is meant to provide free education to all Advanced Level (senior high school) students registered for STEM related subjects (Maths, Computer Science, Physics, Chemistry and Biology). As at February 2017 there were at least 1,500 students across Zimbabwe getting a free education as part of the STEM Initiative. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
The following key milestones have been achieved: 
 
\0xEF According to the 2015 Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS), 91 per cent of females and 94 per cent of males have attended school.  
\0xEF The median number of years of educational attainment is similar for males (6.7 years) and females (6.5 years).  
\0xEF Literacy is nearly universal with 94 per cent of women and men able to read and write.  As shown in Table 8, the literacy rate declined from 97 per cent in 2002 to 90.5 per cent in 2004 before rising to 97.2 per cent in 2011 then declined to 94.3 per cent in 2015. 
\0xEF Secondary school attendance has been on the increase: Secondary school net attendance rate rose from 39 per cent in 2005/06 to 45 per cent in 2009 and 48 per cent in 2010/11 then 50.4 per cent in 2015. However, primary school net attendance rate has remained largely constant at 91 per cent in 2005/06; 2009 and 2015 (see Figure 9). 
Table 7: Trends in Public Education Expenditure, 2009-2017 

2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Public Education 
Expenditure (% of Total 
Government 
Expenditure) 
15.8 
17.6 
19.1 
18.6 
18.5 
19.4 
18.3 
16.0 
Public Education 
Expenditure (% of GDP) 
3.24 
4.52 
5.28 
5.6 
5.8 
6.4 
   5.7 
   5.5 
Source: Calculations based on Ministry of Finance figures. The figures for 2015, 2016 and 2017 are based on Budget allocations. 

Source: Zimbabwe Demographic and Health Survey (ZDHS) 2015 Final Report. 
 
Table 8: Literacy Rates by Sex, Rural and Urban Residence (2002, 2004, 2011 and 2015)  
Sex 

2002 


2004 


2011 


2015 


Rura
l 
Urba
n 
Tota
l 
Rura
l 
Urba
n 
Tota
l 
Rura
l 
Urba
n 
Tota
l 
Rura
l 
Urba
n 
Tota
l 
Male 
96 
99 
97 
90.9 
98.3 
93.8 
96.8 
99.8 
97.8 
91.8 
98.5 
94.2 
Femal
e 
94 
98 
96 
81.2 
97.5 
87.4 
95.1 
99.2 
96.6 
91.8 
98.5 
94.4 
Both Sexes 
95 
99 
97 
85.8 
97.9 
90.5 
95.9 
99.5 
97.2 
91.8 
98.5 
94.3 
Source: 2002 Population Census; 2004 Labour Force Survey; 2011 Labour Force Survey; 2015 ZDHS 
 
Challenges  
 
Despite Zimbabweis stellar achievements in education there are still challenges that need to be addressed. These include: 
 
\0xEF Inadequate financing of public education despite the fact that the education sector consistently receives the highest share of resources within the national budget. 
\0xEF High pupil/teacher ratios (PTRs) particularly for public schools. 
\0xEF Inadequate school infrastructure, including inadequate Early Child Development (ECD) facilities, science laboratories, libraries, electricity, computers, water and sanitation among others. 
 
There is need to improve learning outcomes at all levels in the education system. Prioritising the education and training of young girls and women in the STEM fields will help to bridge the gender gap. 
 
 
 
 
 
Goal 5: Achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Zimbabwe is committed to the achievement of gender equality and women empowerment. In line with this commitment, the country has ratified a number of gender related international and regional instruments. These include the Convention on the Elimination of all forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), the Beijing Platform for Action (BPfA), the African Charter on the Rights of Women and the Southern African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development.  
 
The Constitution provides a robust legal framework for the promotion of SGD 5.  In particular, Section 3(g) of the Constitution clearly spells out gender equality as one of the founding and guiding values placed on a par with values such as the rule of law and good governance. Section 56 (2) of the new Constitution clearly states that \0xEBWomen and men have the right to equal treatment including to the right to equal opportunities in political, economic, cultural and social spheres.i Section 56 (3) states that \0xEBEvery person  has the right not to be treated in an unfairly discriminatory manner on such grounds as custom , culture sex gender, marital status, age, pregnancy, disability among other grounds.i Section 17 calls upon Government to ensure full gender balance and to take measures to promote the full participation of women in all spheres on the basis of equality with men. This includes equal representation in all institutions, agencies of government, commissions and other elective bodies at all levels. Womenis access to resources, including land on the basis of equality with men is also guaranteed. Furthermore, Section 124(1) (b) provides for seats reserved for women. The reservation of seats is aimed at promoting female participation in the political sphere. Government has put in place several policies and strategies to actualise these provisions and include: 
 
\0xEF The National Gender Policy (NGP) (2017) which seeks to achieve a gender just society where men and women enjoy equality and participate as equal partners in the development process of the country. The policy goal is \0xEBto eradicate gender discrimination and inequalities in all spheres of life and development.i The thematic areas of the Revised National Gender Policy have been aligned to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
The Zimbabwe Gender Commission (ZGC) whose functions include among others: to monitor issues concerning gender equality to ensure gender equality as provided for in the Constitution; to investigate possible violations of rights relating to gender; to conduct research into issues relating to gender and social justice, and to recommend 
changes to laws and practices which lead to discrimination based on gender.
  
? 
\0xEF The outlawing of marriage of persons below the age of 18 by the Constitutional Court in 2016. This is a landmark ruling that will advance child rights in Zimbabwe by helping to end the harmful and prevalent practice of marrying children. The ruling not only upholds the Constitution but also reaffirms Zimbabweis commitment to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child. 
\0xEF In 2016, Zimbabwe developed a National Action Plan to end Child marriage. The 
National Action Plan on Ending Child Marriage will guide Zimbabwe in undertaking programmes to address the root causes of child marriages as it provides for Economic Empowerment of Girls and young women and strengthening child protection mechanisms. 
\0xEF In 2016, Zimbabwe developed a National Gender Based Violence Strategy and a National Programme on GBV Prevention and Response (2016-2020). 
\0xEF In 2016 the Government of Zimbabwe established 2 One Stop Centres (OSCs) for survivors of Gender Based Violence in two provinces of the country which are Matabeleland South and Midlands. The OSCs are designed to reduce the number of institutions that a survivor must visit to receive basic support following an incident of GBV. The One Stop Model of service provision brings together different service providers namely health, psycho-social and victim friendly services under one roof. In 2016, the one stop centres offered services to a total of 17 000 GBV survivors.  
\0xEF Appointment of an Anti-Domestic Violence Council by Government in April 2017 in line with the provisions of the Domestic Violence Act. This council comprises traditional leaders, government officials and members of civil society. Some of the functions of the Council include: to keep under constant review the problem of domestic violence in Zimbabwe; to take all the steps to disseminate information and increase the awareness of the public on issues of domestic violence; and to promote research into the problem of domestic violence. 
\0xEF The 2016-2020 ZUNDAF also provides an entry point for the Government of Zimbabwe, the UN, development partners and stakeholders to address gender inequalities in line with the Constitution and ZIMASSET through specific programming on key issues such as violence against women, womenis participation in politics and decision making, and womenis economic empowerment, while at the same time mainstreaming gender in all other priority areas. Through integrating the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly Goal 5 to achieve gender equality and empower all women and girls, ZUNDAF interventions will focus on: strengthening the capacity of institutions to promote gender equality; strengthening the legal and policy frameworks; empowering women and girls to exercise their rights; and creating an enabling and supportive community environment. 
\0xEF In 2016, Zimbabwe developed the National Monitoring and Evaluation Framework for Gender Equality and Women Empowerment to improve accountability and implementation of gender equality and women empowerment commitments in Zimbabwe. The GEWE M&E Framework promotes an inclusive, multi-sectoral, and multi-stakeholder approach which facilitates strong involvement of not only state institutions, but also independent bodies set up by the government and non-state actors (including CSOs, the private sector, research institutions, and development partners) in reinforcing measurement of, and accountability for GEWE-related development results. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
The following key developments/milestones have been achieved: 
 
\0xEF Representation of women in decision-making bodies has increased. The representation of women in the senate increased from 23.2 per cent in 2012 to 47.5 per cent in 2017 (Figure 10 and Table 9) and from 16 per cent in 2012 to 32.6 per 
cent in 2017 in the National Assembly (Figure 11). Zimbabwe fares better than both the SSA and World averages as shown in Figure 12. There is room for improvement in terms of the women representation in the cabinet. There is also need to increase the participation of women in key leadership positions in parastatals/state enterprises. 
\0xEF Increase in female judges in the Supreme and Labour Courts: Table 10 shows the distribution of personnel working in the Judicial Service Commission (JSC) for the years 2013, 2014 and 2015. Across the years, there were more female judges than men in the Supreme Court and in the Labour Court. Among the Magistrates in the Chief Magistrateis Department, women were underrepresented across the years. 
\0xEF The 2014 female HDI value for Zimbabwe is 0.487, in contrast with 0.529 for males, resulting in a Gender Development Index (GDI) value of 0.922 (Table 11). In comparison, GDI values for Lesotho and Kenya are 0.953 and 0.913 respectively. Zimbabwe has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.504, ranking it 112 out of 155 countries in 2014.  
\0xEF Increase in the Labour Force Participation by women. In the labour market, approximately 41 per cent of women and 65 per cent of men aged 15-49 are employed. Among women, 37 per cent were employed in 2010-11, compared with 41 per cent in 2015. Among men, the percentage has increased from 61 per cent to 65 per cent. Women remain trapped in low productivity economic activities. 
\0xEF Generally women spend more time in unpaid activities than men. Women spent an average 17 hours per week in unpaid caring for children under five years in own household compared to 7 hours among men. Women spent an average of 14hours per week caring for the sick, disabled and elderly while men spent about 11 hours. In terms of housekeeping and other home duties, women spent about 18 hours and men an average of 8 hours. 
\0xEF Reduction in proportion of women experiencing physical violence: Government places high priority to efforts to prevent and combat violence and sexual abuse against women. These efforts are bearing fruit as shown in Figure 13. 
\0xEF Women have lower status in access, control and ownership of economic assets and positions in decision-making. According to the 2015 ZDHS about 37 per cent of women and men own a house. Among women, 30 per cent own land, and among men 34 per cent own land. 
\0xEF Data from the Central Business Register Inquiry 2015 shows that women generally have a smaller share of business establishments compared to men. Out of 31,000 sole proprietor establishments, 22 per cent are owned by women. Women had majority share ownership in about 17 per cent of establishments that operated as cooperatives. 
\0xEF More females than males are progressing to secondary school: Female n 79.1 per cent; Male n 76.7 per cent (2015 World Bank Gender Data Portal). 
\0xEF Lower secondary completion rate for female is higher than male: Female n 66.6 per cent; Male n 64.5 per cent (2015 World Bank Gender Data Portal). 
\0xEF Prevalence of Gender Based Violence (GBV) still high: percentage of ever-married women age 15-49 who have experienced various form of violence ever or in the 12 months preceding the survey, committed by their husbands/partners (ZDHS 2015). Physical violence: ever (30.7 per cent); often (3.3 per cent); sometimes (11.9 per cent); often or sometimes (15.2 per cent). Sexual violence: ever (12.7 per cent); often (2.4 per cent); often or sometimes (9.3 per cent). Emotional violence: ever (31.5 per cent); often (7.2 per cent); often or sometimes (23.5 per cent).  Frequency of physical or sexual violence: Percentage of ever-married women who have experienced physical or sexual violence by any husband/partner in the past 12 months, according to background characteristics: 15-19 (31.5 per cent); 20-24 (25.3 per cent); 25-29 (24.7 per cent); 20-39 (18.2 per cent); 40-49 (10.7 per cent). 
\0xEF Incidence of child marriage: percentage of women age 15-49 married before age 15 (4.5 per cent); percentage of women age 20-49 married before 15 (5.4 per cent)/before 18 (32.8 per cent) (MICS 2014). 
 
Table 9: Participation of Women and Men in Selected Decision Making Positions 
Institution/Area 
Women 
Men 
Total 
Share of Women (%) 
National Assembly (Lower House) 
86 
184 
270 
31.9 
Senate (Upper House) 
38 
42 
80 
47.5 
Cabinet Ministers 
4 
22 
26 
15.4 
Provincial Ministers 
4 
6 
10 
40 
Board of Parastatals/State Enterprises 
29 
71 
100 
29 
Chief Executive Officers of 
Parastatals/State Enterprises 
23 
77 
100 
23 
Vice Chancellors of State Universities 
3 
8 
11 
27.3 
Ambassadors 
10 
31 
41 
24.4 
Consulars 
0 
5 
5 
0 
Source: Understanding Gender Equality in Zimbabwe: Women and Men Report 2016. 
 
Table 10: Distribution of Positions in the Judiciary by Sex, 2013-2016 
                                   
Position 
2013 
2014 
2015 



Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Supreme Court 
Chief Justice 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

Deputy Chief Justice 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

Judges 
5 
3 
5 
3 
6 
5 
High Court 
Judge 
President 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 

Judges 
11 
18 
11 
18 
13 
18 
Labour Court 
Senior Judge 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 

Judges 
10 
5 
10 
4 
10 
4 
Chief Magistrate's Dept. 
Magistrates 
92 
115 
92 
115 
98 
112 
Source: Understanding Gender Equality in Zimbabwe: Women and Men Report 2016. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 11 Zimbabweis GDI for 2015 relative to selected countries and groups 

Life expectancy at birth 
Expected years of schooling 
Mean years of schooling 
GNI per capita 
HDI values 
F-M 
ratio 

Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
Female 
Male 
GDI value 
Zimbabwe 
60.7 
57.7 
10.2 
10.5 
7.3 
8.2 
1,360 
1,822 
0.496 
0.535 
0.927 
Kenya 
64.1 
60.3 
10.8 
11.4 
5.7 
7 
2,357 
3,405 
0.531 
0.577 
0.919 
Lesotho 
50 
49.9 
11.2 
10.3 
7 
5.3 
2,631 
4,020 
0.485 
0.505 
0.962 
SubSaharan 
Africa 
60.2 
57.6 
9.1 
10.3 
4.5 
6.3 
2,637 
4,165 
0.488 
0.557 
0.877 
Low HDI 
60.7 
58 
8.5 
10 
3.6 
5.6 
1,950 
3,365 
0.455 
0.536 
0.849 
Source: UNDP 2016 Human Development Report 
 
Table 12: Literacy Rates by Age Group and Gender 
Year 
2011 
2015 
Age Group 


15-19 
Male 
94.3 
91 

Female 
96.3 
94.2 
20-24 
Male 
96.3 
94 

Female 
96.1 
94.9 
25-29 
Male 
97.1 
95 

Female 
95 
95.4 
30-34 
Male 
96.3 
96.3 

Female 
94.5 
95.1 
35-39 
Male 
96.4 
95.5 

Female 
93.5 
94.3 
40-44 
Male 
96.7 
96 

Female 
90 
94.2 
45-49 
Male 
93.6 
95.9 

Female 
79 
88.9 
Total 
Male 
95.7 
94.2 

Female 
93.8 
94.4 
Source: 2010/11 ZDHS; 2015 ZDHS 
  

Source: Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) PARLINE database. 
 	 
 

Source: Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) PARLINE database. 
 
 

Source: Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) PARLINE database. 
 
Challenges  
 
Although Zimbabwe has made significant strides, there are still a number of gender related challenges in the political, economic and social sectors.  As noted in the 2014 Zimbabwe Country Analysis Report by the UN, the exercise of womenis rights is negatively impacted by: 
 
\0xEF Weak programming not backed by gender statistics: Programming still needs to be strengthened through the use of available gender statistics and a gender   analysis to make gender mainstreaming more visible. 
\0xEF Identified gender issues which are not fully resourced. 
\0xEF Laws and policies have been enacted for an enabling legal environment against gender based violence, however there is need for strengthened support for the enforcement of laws and policies. 
\0xEF Socio-cultural practices and attitudes continue to perpetuate the high prevalence of violence against women and girls, which negatively affects their abilities to exercise many of their socio-economic rights. 
\0xEF The majority of women are economically inactive and are concentrated in vulnerable employment in the informal sector. Women, who are in the formal economy, remain largely excluded from financial services and products that cater for both their business and household needs, even though they are 57 per cent of the business owners (FinScope Survey 2012). 
 
Goal 6: Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Water and sanitation are crucial not only for health, but also for other key aspects of development, such as gender equality, education and economic growth. Government has prioritised availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation and achieve affordable and equitable access to safe drinking water, with a focus on previously underserved segments. It also aims to improve water quality and expand access across all regions. Zimbabwe has made positive efforts to ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all. Some of these initiatives include: 
 
\0xEF Provision for the right to \0xEBsafe, clean and portable water\0xD6.i under Section 77 of the Constitution. The Constitution also specifically protects potentially vulnerable groups, including Section 80 (women), Section 81 (children), Section 82 (the elderly), Section 83 (the disabled), and Section 84 (veterans of the liberation struggle). This right is not limited to citizens and permanent residents only, but to every person in the territory of Zimbabwe.  
\0xEF Government has come up with a National Water Policy whose overall aim is to improve the security and availability of water to all the multi-purpose users. Its objectives are based on harnessing, conserving, protecting and managing water for multi-purpose use.  
\0xEF Cooperating partners have also been complementing government efforts to improve water and sanitation in the country. For instance, UNICEF has come up with a WASH programme which aims to improve equitable use of safe drinking water, sanitation and hygiene practices. UNICEF, with the help of the government and Australian Aid, has introduced Participatory Health and Hygiene Education (PHHE) in Mutoko under their \0xEB14 Small Towns Wash Programme (STWP)i. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
The following achievements have been made: 
 
\0xEF Results from the 2015 ZDHS show that 76.3 per cent of households have access to improved sources of drinking water (Table 13).  These figures however hide a wide disparity in access to safe drinking water between urban areas and rural areas and also even within urban areas (Figure 14).  
\0xEF Meanwhile 39.9 per cent of households have access to improved not shared sanitation facility (Figure 15).  
\0xEF Chronic water shortages are more pronounced in urban areas of Zimbabwe, and are being experienced in a context of increasing water consumption needs. 
 
Table 13: Access to improved water and sanitation among households 
Indicator 
2005/06  
2010/11  
2014  
2015  
Source 
ZDHS 
ZDHS 
MICS 
ZDHS 
Access to improved water 
75.8 
76.7 
76.1 
76.3 
Access to improved, not shared 
sanitation facility 
42.0 
37.3 
35.0 
39.9 
 
 
Figure 14: Distribution of Households by Source of Drinking Water, 2014-2015 
	120	
	98.4 	97.2 
76.1 

78.1 

67.5 

68.5 


32.4 

31.4 

23.8 

21.8 

1.5 

2.6 
Improved Sources
Unimproved Sources
Improved Sources
Unimproved Sources
2014 (MICS)
2015 (ZDHS)
	100	
80
	60
40
20 0
	 Urban	Rural	Total
Source: 2014 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS); 2015 ZDHS 
 
Figure 15: Distribution of Households by Sanitation Facilities, 2014-2015 
	120	
	98.2 	95.2 


    61.8 53.7 
    66.8 52.3 
46.3 
38.2 
47.6 
33.2 


	1.8 	
	4.7 	
Improved Facilities	Unimproved
Facilities
Improved Facilities	Unimproved
Facilities

2014 (MICS)
2015 (ZDHS)

100	80
	60
40
20 0
	 Urban	Rural	Total
Source: 2014 MICS; 2015 ZDHS 
 
Challenges  
 
Water development and supply is lagging behind water demand for domestic and industrial use. Water supply challenges in the country have been attributed to:  
 
\0xEF Obsolete infrastructure. 
\0xEF Increase in population. 
\0xEF Rapid urbanisation. 
\0xEF Low storage capacity of water sources.  
\0xEF Inadequate financing. 
 
Further efforts are needed to deal with the increasing impacts of climate change, such as changes in temperature, higher rainfall patterns, and more frequent extreme weather patterns. There is also need to bridge the huge public awareness gap in terms of water access issues especially in the rural areas as they are rarely covered by the media. 
 
Goal 7: Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Access to sustainable energy is key for sustainable development. Access to energy enables businesses to grow, generates jobs, and creates new markets. Promoting the use of clean and efficient energy is at the forefront of the Governmentis priorities. Government has come up with the following initiatives to ensure access to affordable, reliable and sustainable energy for all: 
 
\0xEF A National Energy Policy that seeks to promote the optimal supply and utilisation of energy, for socio-economic development in a safe, sustainable and environmentally friendly manner.  
\0xEF The Rural Electrification Fund (REF) was established through an Act of Parliament (Chapter 13:20) of 2002. This resulted in the establishment of the Rural Electrification Agency (REA) whose main focus is to spearhead rapid and equitable electrification of rural areas in Zimbabwe. The Rural Electrification Fund Act provides for the funding of the programme through levies, loans, fiscal allocations, grants and donations. At present, the Rural Electrification programmes are primarily funded by 6 per cent levy, levied on all electricity consumers as well as fiscal allocations. 
\0xEF Zimbabwe is one the African countries benefiting from renewable energy technology through a South-South cooperation on clean energy programme sponsored by the UN Development Programme (UNDP). Government has set the target to increase the share of renewable energy consumption to 20 per cent by the year 2022. In that regard, a number of targets have been set in solar, hydro and wind energy, primarily based on private sector investments.  
\0xEF The country is also a beneficiary of the UNis Perez-Guerrero Trust Fund (PGTF), which promotes South-South cooperation in renewable energy globally. The PGTF, which is managed by the UN Office for South-South Cooperation (UNOSSC), was established by the UN General Assembly in 1983 to support economic and technical cooperation activities among developing countries.  
\0xEF Zimbabwe has also joined the global effort to eliminate energy poverty by 2030 under the United Nationis Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) initiative. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
Key trends and developments include: 
 
\0xEF Thirty-four (34) per cent of households in Zimbabwe have access to electricity (81 per cent in urban areas and 10 per cent in rural areas), which is a slight decrease from 37 per cent in the 2010-11 ZDHS.  
\0xEF A majority of urban households use electricity for cooking (66 per cent); in contrast, only 5 per cent of rural households use electricity for this purpose (Figure 16).  
\0xEF According to the 2016 Human Development Report, renewable energy consumption (% of total final energy consumption) was 75.6 per cent in 2012. Per capita carbon dioxide emissions in tonnes were 0.9 in 2013. 
 

Source: 2014 MICS; 2015 ZDHS 
 
Challenges  
 
The major challenge remains the low per capita energy consumption especially in the rural areas owing to the energy deficit. The country is however endowed with a variety of renewable and fossil energy resources which need to be exploited in a sustainable manner to close the existing supply and demand gap while also accelerating access to green energy. Regional cooperation is essential for the development of large-scale hydropower resources. 
 
Goal 8: Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all 
 
Policy Environment 
 
The Government is committed to promoting sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent work for all. Government has put in place a number of policies to grow the economy and to sustain that economic growth. These include: 
 
\0xEF Government came up with a strategic protectionist policy through the promulgation of Statutory Instrument 64 of 2016 to support the local industry.  This has resulted in capacity utilisation in local industry increasing significantly from 34.3 per cent in 2015 to 47.4 per cent in 2016 according to the Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries (CZI) 2016 Manufacturing Sector Survey report. 
\0xEF Some progress has also been recorded in terms of ease of doing business reforms. Government in strategic coloration with multiple stakeholders that include development partners, civil society, private sector, academia and various interest groups embarked on the ease of doing business reforms in September 2015. The reforms are being spearheaded by the Office of the President and Cabinet (OPC). The reforms focused on the 10 global indices of doing business as follows: Starting a Business; Protecting Minority Investors; Enforcing Contracts; Resolving Insolvency; 
Getting Credit; Paying Taxes; Trading Across Borders; Construction Permits; Registering Property; and Getting Electricity. In pursuit of these ease of doing business reforms, five Technical Working Groups (TWGs) were constituted to deal with the following areas: Starting a Business and Protecting Minority Investors; Enforcing Contracts and Resolving Insolvency; Getting Credit; Paying Taxes and Trading Across Borders; and Construction Permits and Registering Property.  
\0xEF Through the 2016-2020 Zimbabwe United Nations Development Framework, the United Nations in Zimbabwe will continue to prioritise efforts to increase access to income and decent work opportunities, particularly for young people and women. In this regard, the UNDP has expanded the Young Farmers Innovation Lab following a successful completion of a pilot project that was implemented from January to August 2016. The project, which is designed to foster collaborative entrepreneurship among young farmers and to transform farming practices in commercially viable agri-business ventures, targeted 100 young people farming in Honde Valley, Murewa, Harare periurban and Chimanimani with business development skills and ICT competencies. The first phase saw the farmers successfully develop a brand of sustainable farming produce that was marketed and sold in leading retail supermarkets. Some of the products marketed include poultry meat, fresh tomatoes and dried fruits. The second phase seeks to expand the collaborative programme to more young farmers in additional districts across the country. The young farmers innovation lab brings together UNDP, Zimbabwe Farmers Union, Harare Institute of Technology, Watershed College, Oxfam, Barclays Zimbabwe and German Corporation for International Cooperation (GIZ) among others, all seeking to leverage their areas of comparative strength to jointly support young farmers. 
\0xEF The International Labour Organisation (ILO) has come up with a Skills for Youth Employment and Rural Development Programme which seeks to promote local economic development through creation of new economic and employment opportunities in 32 rural districts in Zimbabwe. The programme has adopted the Training for Rural Economic Empowerment (TREE) methodology. The TREE methodology is a community-based technical and vocational skills development focusing on agriculture and rural development, including value chain development, skills upgrading and projects targeting out-of-school youth. Through the TREE methodology, 5,457 youth n aged between 18 and 32 have benefited through access to microfinance and/or training opportunities to expand their businesses. Under the same programme, in 2015 and 2016 Horticultural Pilot Projects have been supported in five drought prone districts of the country. The projects are a platform to enhance womenis entrepreneurial skills as women are also trained in agro-processing and marketing. The programme has 800 direct women beneficiaries who have been assisted in setting up irrigation facilities for their horticultural projects. More than 10 000 people benefit from the projects in Food and nutrition security and Employment  
\0xEF In 2016, Zimbabwe established a pilot Women in Mining Service Centre in Matabeleland South Province. The Centre is a gold processing plant to help women miners to realise more outcomes from their gold mining activities. The Centre is benefiting about 50,000 women who are currently involved in artisanal gold mining from Matabeleland South Province.  
 
Status and Trends  
 
\0xEF Zimbabweis Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth declined from 1.1 per cent in 2015 to an estimated 0.6 per cent in 2016 (Table 14). It is however projected to increase by 3.8 per cent in 2017 with the agriculture, tourism, manufacturing, construction and financial sectors all expected to improve. 
\0xEF According to the 2016 manufacturing sector survey by the Confederation of Zimbabwe Industries (CZI) capacity utilisation in manufacturing rose to 47.4 per cent from 34.3 per cent in 2015, largely due to an increase in production by companies whose products were placed under Statutory Instrument 64, passed in June 2016, which imposed a temporary ban on imports of certain products. 
\0xEF The share of informal employment in total employment increased from 80 per cent in 2004 to 84.2 per cent in 2011 and 94.5 per cent in 2014.  The worst affected are the youth, who have little labour market experience. The 2014 Labour Force Survey reveals that as much as 98 per cent of the currently employed youth aged 15-24 years and 96 per cent of currently employed youth aged 15-34 years were in informal employment.  
\0xEF In terms of enterprises, the FinScope survey of 2012 highlighted that 85 per cent of the 3.4 million Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) were unregistered. Such levels of informalisation are profound considering that 5.7 million people were working in MSMEs in 2012, 2.8 million were business owners while 2.9 million were employees.  
\0xEF Out of 7.1 million economically active persons, around 89 per cent were employed and 11 per cent were unemployed. For the economically active population, the highest percentage of labour force (52 per cent) were own account workers (communal, peri-urban and resettlement farming) followed by paid or permanent employees (14 per cent). Forty-eight (48) percent of the male labour force were own account workers (communal, peri-urban and resettlement farming), 19 per cent were paid employee-permanent and 12 per cent were own account worker (other). Of the women in the labour force, 56 per cent were own account workers (communal, peri-urban and resettlement farming), 15 per cent were unemployed and 13 per cent were own account worker (other). For the economically active in rural areas, the highest percentage of the labour force (76 per cent) were own account workers (communal, peri-urban and resettlement farming) followed by paid employee-permanent at (9 per cent). 
 	 
Table 14: Trends in annual Real GDP growth  

2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Real GDP growth rate (%) 
6 
11.4 
11.9 
10.6 
4.5 
3.8 
1.1 
0.6 
1.7 
Real GDP per capita growth rate (%) 
4.2 
9.5 
9.7 
8.2 
2.2 
1.5 
-1.8 
- 
- 
Source: World Development Indicators (2017); 2017 National Budget Statement 
 
 
Challenges  
 
The major challenge remains the high levels of informality and vulnerable employment. Government is however working on scaling up active labour market policies in partnership with cooperating partners.  
 
Goal 9: Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster innovation 
 
Policy Environment 
 
Sound infrastructure is crucial for a well-functioning society and competitive industrial sector. Building resilient infrastructure, promoting inclusive and sustainable industrialization, and fostering innovation are firmly placed at the centre of the Governmentis development plan. The country is promoting sustainable industrialisation through the implementation of the industrial development policy which will run from 20172021. The objective is to increase the manufacturing sectoris contribution to gross domestic product to 30 per cent and its contribution to exports to 50 per cent. The Special Economic Zones bill was signed into law by the president in October 2016. Government has already designated 3 sites as special economic zones namely: Sunway City, Bulawayo Industrial Area and Victoria Falls.  
 
Major infrastructure projects have been launched in the areas of utilities, transportation and connectivity, and special economic zones. Some of the key initiatives include: 
 
\0xEF Rehabilitation of water and sewerage infrastructure in several urban centres. Among them are the Urgent Water Supply and Sanitation Rehabilitation Project Phase 1 in Mutare, Masvingo, Kwekwe, Chegutu, Harare, and Chitungwiza.  
\0xEF Expansion of the Kariba South power station. Emergency Power Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project to rehabilitate power transmission and distribution systems as well as the rehabilitation of the Ash plant at Hwange thermal power station.  
\0xEF Upgrading of Victoria Falls Airport to cater for wide body aircraft with an expanded runway. 
\0xEF The completion of the Tokwe Mukosi dam is a major achievement with the Tokwe Mukosi dam now the countryis largest inland dam. This development is expected to promote the agricultural and tourism sectors. The dam also has the capacity to generate hydro-electricity and there is provision for the construction of a 15 MW power plant. 
\0xEF The government has commissioned the dualisation project of the Beitbridge-Harare highway. This project is expected to cost US$1 billion and is expected to boost trade in the Southern Africa region. Geiger International of Austria has been contracted by the government to dualise the highway under a 25-year Build Operate and Transfer model. 
\0xEF The Government has embarked on the process of migrating from analogue to digital television broadcasting in line with developments across the world and the renewal of the countryis radio transmission network to ensure universal access to broadcasting services. This project is expected to increase the number of television channels delivered to the public from one to twelve, improve television reception and picture quality, provide value added services to the television set and generally improve both radio and television coverage from the current 55 per cent to at least 80 per cent of the population. The digitalization project also presents business opportunities to the countryis creative arts industry in the production and supply of content to the digital platform, resulting in employment creation and reduction in poverty, growth of the creative arts industry and contributing to the economic growth of Zimbabwe. 
 
Status and Trends  
 
\0xEF Notwithstanding, infrastructure development remains inadequate.  According to the 2016-17 Global Competitiveness Report, inadequate supply of infrastructure is the fifth most problematic factor for doing business with the country ranked 123 out of 138 countries with a score of 2.5 in terms of infrastructure. In the 2016 Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Zimbabwe is ranked 34 out of 54 countries for 2015 in the infrastructure sub category with a score of 34.1 out of 100, down from 41.6 out of 100 in 2014.  The African Development Bank estimated that about USD 14.2 billion is needed to close Zimbabweis infrastructure gap. The high rate of recurrent expenditure crowds out capital expenditure necessary for infrastructure rehabilitation and development.  
\0xEF Zimbabwe has however experienced a swift uptake of the internet with the percentage of individuals using the internet increasing markedly from 4 per cent in 2009 to 16.4 per cent in 2015 as shown in Table 15. 
 
Table 15: Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 

2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Zimbabwe  
4.0 
6.4 
8.4 
12.0 
15.5 
16.3 
16.4 
Zambia 
6.3 
10.0 
11.5 
13.5 
15.4 
19.0 
21.0 
Mozambique 
2.7 
4.2 
4.3 
4.9 
5.4 
5.9 
9.0 
South Africa 
10.0 
24.0 
34.0 
41.0 
46.5 
49.0 
51.9 
Source: International Telecommunications Union (ITU) online database 
http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/statistics/2016/Individuals_Internet_2000-2015.xls 
 
Challenges  
 
The greatest challenge relates to the limited fiscal space exacerbated by the fact that the bulk of fiscal revenues are going towards financing recurrent expenditures. There are opportunities to unlock greater benefits through leveraging public-private partnerships. 
 
Goal 13: Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
 
Although Zimbabweis contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions is low it is nevertheless highly vulnerable to the risks of climate change.  Zimbabwe is a signatory to the following multilateral environmental agreements, among others: the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer; United Nations Convention to Combat 
Desertification (UNCCD); the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD) and its Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety; Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, in addition to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and its Kyoto Protocol. Zimbabwe also signed the 2016 Paris Agreement although it is yet to ratify it.  
 
The Government launched its National Climate Change Response Strategy that includes REDD+ as one of the mitigation options for reducing greenhouse gases under the forestry sector. The National Climate Change Response Strategy provides a framework for a comprehensive and strategic approach on aspects of adaptation, mitigation, technology, financing, public education and awareness. It will help to inform Government on how to strengthen the climate and disaster management policies. Zimbabwe was admitted as a partner country to the UN-REDD programme in 2013 and has introduced several pilot projects. In addition, several national stakeholders have participated in a number of REDD+ related capacity building activities at various levels. The country is in the process of developing several forestry related projects on climate change adaptation and mitigation. Zimbabwe is also in the process of developing several climate change related policies including the Climate, Renewable Energy and Bio-fuels Policies.  
 
Government has embarked on the process of developing a National Adaptation Plan (NAP) which seeks to develop medium to long term approaches for reducing vulnerability to climate change impacts and facilitating the integration of climate adaptation into ongoing planning processes at national and sub- national levels. The NAP development process is championed under the Scaling up Adaptation in Zimbabwe through Strengthening Integrated Planning Systems Project, an initiative led by the Government of Zimbabwe supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and implemented by the Environmental Management Agency (EMA).  
 
Goal 15: Protect, restore and promote sustainable use of terrestrial ecosystems, sustainably manage forests, combat desertification, and halt and reverse land degradation and halt biodiversity loss 
 
Policy Environment 
 
The Constitution includes environmental rights where by every Zimbabwean has the right to have the environment protected for the benefit of current and future generations through reasonable legislative and other measures; that prevent pollution and ecological degradation, promote conservation and secure ecologically sustainable development and use of natural resources, while promoting economic and social development. 
 
The draft Forest Policy provides a basis for the development of forestry legislation and regulations that are consistent and comprehensive enough for the long term sustainable use of forests and for the participation of people who depend on them for their livelihoods. The Policy supports the diverse ownership and interests of various stakeholders to enhance forest conservation. It also defines intentions of forest management, conservation and development and incorporates issues of deforestation, local communities, value addition and adoption of forestry as a viable land-use option. In addition, it takes cognisance of climate change issues and any other threats that may affect forests in Zimbabwe. The draft Forest Policyis goal is \0xEBto manage, conserve and sustainably utilize forest resources, and to enhance the contribution of the forest sector to development and social equity through active participation of all stakeholders for the benefit of present and future generations of the people of Zimbabwe.i 
 
The UN Environment World Conservation Monitoring Centre and the International Institute for Environment and Development are providing support to eight sub-Saharan African countries including Zimbabwe to help them use their revised National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans to mainstream biodiversity priorities into strategic national and sectoral planning processes.  
 
The African Leadership Group on Biodiversity Mainstreaming, comprising stakeholders from biodiversity, finance and planning authorities in the eight project countries has been established with Zimbabwe being among eight project countries. The Group also includes independent members from across Africa who offer relevant mainstreaming expertise and experience. The Groupis role is to offer support and leadership on different aspects of the link between biodiversity and development, and on mainstreaming biodiversity. The African Leadership Group approach is providing great opportunities for the Group to learn from each other about biodiversity mainstreaming in policy and practice.  
 
The National Biodiversity Forum in Zimbabwe is part of the Steering Committee for the new Sustainable Development Goals Cluster. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
Zimbabwe has 24 gazetted indigenous forests covering 800,000 hectares which are important for the forestry industry; watershed and soil protection; nutrient recycling; biodiversity conservation; climate regulation; carbon sequestration and which act as wildlife habitats. They also provide non-timber forest products; generate revenue from photographic and sport hunting safaris; and employ a substantial number of people. 
 
Forest degradation and deforestation have occurred widely throughout the country due to shifting agriculture with reduced fallow periods and permanent clearing of forests for agriculture (including coffee and tea plantations). It is estimated that 70,000 ha of forest land is lost to agriculture each year. Overgrazing, intensive fuel wood collection and the introduction of invasive species are other causes. These problems are particularly severe in communal areas where most of the population lives. Habitat loss to alien species is also a lead cause of forest biodiversity loss.  
 
According to the 2016 Human Development Report Zimbabwe had a forest area (% of total land area) of 36.45 in 2015. This represents a 36.6 per cent decline over the period 19902015. 
 
 
Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels 
 
Policy Environment 
 
The Constitution provides a number ways for claiming and defending economic, social and cultural rights. It establishes a number of independent institutions to hold the Government accountable to its constitutional duty to respect, promote, protect and fulfil socio-economic rights recognised in the Bill of Rights. Chapter 12 initiatives on oversight bodies include: the National Peace and Reconciliation Commission, Anti-corruption Commission, Zimbabwe Human Rights Commission, Gender Commission and the Universal Periodic Review on Human Rights have put a stronger foundation for building an inclusive and peaceful society for sustainable development. 
 
Status and Trends 
 
According to the 2016 Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Zimbabwe and Rwanda are among African countries where governance has improved significantly in the last decade. The country scored very highly on national security, participation, human rights and gender. 
 
According to the 2005-06 ZDHS, 74 per cent of childrenis births were registered, but this dropped to 49 per cent in the 2010-11 ZDHS, and 44 per cent in the 2015 ZDHS (Figure 17). 
 
 

 
 
SDG 17: Strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development 
 
The scope of the SDGs is so comprehensive that no state, organisation or institution can pursue the 2030 Agenda in isolation. Zimbabwe supports funding modalities that foster stronger collaboration among development agencies.  New and strategic partnerships n involving public and private sectors, multilateral institutions, civil society with academia and non-governmental organisations n must address this challenge together.  
 
Fiscal space remains severely constrained because of the poor performance of domestic revenue inflows against the background of rising recurrent expenditures. The country is in an unsustainable fiscal position with the bulk of the fiscal revenues (about 90 per cent) financing recurrent expenditure. Tables 16 and 17 show the analysis of the fiscal space and public expenditure for the period 2009-2016. The success and sustainability of the agenda 2030 calls on the government to mobilise domestic resources. 
 
It has been shown that remittances are a significant and stable source of financing accounting for as much as 30 per cent of GDP in some developing economies contributing immensely to development and poverty eradication. There is scope for the country to leverage greater remittances inflows for sustainable development by increasing incentives, reducing the cost of remittances services and improving the overall investment climate. 
 
Successful reengagement of the international community is crucial to improving the countryis creditworthiness and enhance access to global capital markets. This will help to unlock greater development finance and investment inflows. The country can also enhance fiscal space by dealing with illicit financial leakages and reforming state-owned enterprises. 
 
There is opportunity and scope to strengthen South-South partnerships by promoting regional cooperation and integration, technology transfers and sharing of knowledge. In particular cooperation in infrastructure development would be crucial in order to ensure the availability of a sufficient, integrated, efficient and effective infrastructure that will support and sustain regional economic development, trade, investment, agriculture and contribute towards sustainable development. 
 
In view of the fact that the global commitments on financing development have not been fully met there is need for development partners to fulfil their promises and commitments in the spirit of the Monterrey Consensus and G8 Gleneagles Summit. This will restore trust, confidence and mutual respect in global partnerships. 
 
Table 16: Analysis of the Fiscal Space 

2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Total Revenue (% of GDP) 
11.2 
24.2 
26.0 
27.4 
27.8 
27.0 
26.7 
24.7 
Tax Revenue (% of GDP) 
10.6 
22.9 
23.7 
25.7 
25.4 
25.2 
25.3 
22.9 
Non-tax Revenue (% of GDP) 
0.6 
1.3 
2.3 
1.7 
2.4 
1.8 
1.4 
2.0 
FDI (% of GDP) 
1.3 
1.8 
3.5 
3.2 
3.0 
3.7 
2.9 
- 
Transfers (% of GDP) 
14.8 
15.0 
17.5 
17.1 
14.0 
13.4 
14.2 
- 
ODA (% of GDP) 
8.8 
7.4 
6.4 
7.9 
6.2 
5.5 
5.6 
- 
Source: calculated from Ministry of Finance data. 
 
Table 17: Analysis of Public Expenditure 

2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Total Expenditure (% of GDP) 
10.7 
22.2 
25.8 
27.5 
29.7 
28.3 
29.4 
34.8 
Current Expenditure (% of GDP) 
10.2 
16.8 
22.0 
24.1 
26.2 
25.8 
25.6 
27.9 
Capital Expenditure (% of GDP) 
0.6 
5.4 
3.8 
3.4 
3.5 
2.5 
3.8 
6.8 
Source: calculated from Ministry of Finance data. 
 
e. Thematic Analysis: Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in a changing world 
 
Wrenching structural changes: The Zimbabwean economy has undergone far reaching structural changes owing to deindustrialisation and the rise in informal economic activities. Economic growth has been erratic underpinned by the primary and resource sectors (agriculture and mining) with the contribution of the manufacturing sector declining from 15.5 per cent in 2009 to 12.8 per cent in 2013 and about 9 per cent in 2015.  
 
Rising informality: The rising informality presents challenges for domestic resource mobilisation. It has been shown that informality discourages investment and weakens the overall competitiveness of the economy as most informal enterprises are stuck in a vicious cycle of low productivity. Informal enterprises are also locked out of markets for finance, technology, and other resources that would enable them to close the technology gap. In many cases informal enterprises can remain stuck in an informality trap. The preponderance of informal sector and often vulnerable employment has perpetuated low productivity, extreme poverty and inequality. Consequently, tax revenues have remained largely subdued. 
 
Debt distress: The country is in debt distress with large external payment arrears, against a context of limited fiscal space posing a serious impediment to both external sustainability and economic development. The high public debt burden has been further exacerbated by the structural weaknesses inherent in the Zimbabwean economy such as lack of diversified export base and declining terms of trade and competitiveness, which make it difficult for the country to adjust to changing world demand for tradable goods and changing production patterns. These structural weaknesses have constrained the countryis ability to generate high and sustainable growth that is necessary to mitigate and even forestall needless debts and their attendant problems.  
 
Infrastructure gap: Zimbabwe has a huge infrastructure deficit in basic infrastructure. The sustained deterioration in the quality of infrastructure is related to the inadequate levels of public expenditures for routine and periodic maintenance of the infrastructure networks, especially in power, water and sanitation, and transport. Given its role as an enabler of economic activity, the deterioration in basic infrastructure impacted negatively on productive sectors of the economy and the level and quality of services. According to the 2016-17 Global Competitiveness Report, inadequate supply of infrastructure is cited as the fifth most problematic factor for doing business in Zimbabwe.  
 
Eradicating poverty and promoting prosperity in Zimbabwe is dependent on the promotion of inclusive and sustainable growth; and fostering entrepreneurship and industrialisation. The industrialisation process should be geared towards fostering the transition from informal to formal economy as prescribed by the ILO recommendation 204. A regionally coordinated industrialisation strategy could leverage spillovers of manufacturing across borders, creating productive capacities across Southern Africa through regional value chains and systems. The country must also implement the recommendations of the High Level panel on Illicit Financial Flows in order to preserve the tax base and in turn increase domestic revenue to unlock finances to fund SDGs.  
 
Ensuring universal and equitable access to quality healthcare and education to leverage the youth dividend: Investing in human capital through extending coverage of quality education and health care; strengthening entrepreneurial skills and capacity as well as technical and vocational skills; increasing access to financial services; and promoting participation in decision-making processes will enable Zimbabwe to reap a demographic dividend from its youthful population.  
 
Addressing food insecurity and hunger though enhancing agricultural productivity: Food insecurity remains a challenge in Zimbabwe owing to poor harvests and the drought. Given that 70 per cent of the population relies directly on agriculture for sustenance, enhancing agricultural productivity is critical to pro-poor growth and inclusive development. Since the agricultural sector is increasingly vulnerable to water shortages, investment in irrigation and infrastructure rehabilitation, and emphasis on crops that are more resilient to drought will reduce reliance on rain-fed agriculture and enhance sustainability. There is critical need to build climate resilient infrastructure both in the cities and rural areas that is gender sensitive and incorporates the needs for people with disabilities and the elderly.  
 
Promoting gender equality and womenis empowerment: Despite achieving near gender parity in education, Zimbabwe lags behind in a number of dimensions of SDG5 (such as economic and political empowerment of women). Fostering women entrepreneurship can be a powerful tonic for economic empowerment of women. This can be achieved through increasing access to business advisory services, improving access to financial services and credit facilities as well as promoting decent work.  
 
Improving environmental sustainability: Given the countryis high degree of vulnerability to climate change it is imperative for the country to adopt low-carbon climate-resilient sustainable development pathways. This can be attained by for instance transforming the energy mix in favour of renewable energy sources (such as hydro, solar and wind); moving towards cleaner fuels such as gas-based energy, and employing new technologies for reducing carbon emissions from conventional energy generation. Policies also need to be put in place to encourage industry to adopt sustainable production technologies.  
 
 
 
 
 
f. Institutional Mechanisms 
 
Government has put in place a clear institutional framework to guide the implementation and reporting of SDGs in Zimbabwe consisting of:  
 
\0xEF A Steering Committee to provide overall guidance and strategic leadership to the whole process. The Steering Committee is chaired by the Chief Secretary to the Office of the President and Cabinet (OPC). Members of the Steering Committee include: Permanent Secretaries, Cluster Chairs and Co-chairs, Heads of UN Task Force Agencies, the Private Sector, Civil Society, Parastatals and Development Partners. 
\0xEF A Technical Committee to spearhead the technical processes as well as providing technical back-stopping. The Technical Committee is chaired by the Permanent Secretary in the Ministry of Macroeconomic Planning and Investment Promotion. Membership includes Cluster Chairs and Co-Chairs, SDG focal persons and representatives of all key stakeholders in the Cluster. The focal persons from government ministries ensure that SDGs implementation is mainstreamed within government ministries and operations. 
\0xEF Thematic clusters for mainstreaming and localising SDGs. The SDGs Clusters will be supported by the SDG Secretariat which consists of OPC, Ministry of Macroeconomic Planning and Investment Promotion, UNDP and ZIMSTAT. The Secretariat will be responsible for organising and coordinating key SDG activities and production of the necessary documentation. 
\0xEF A monitoring and evaluation policy including prioritised SDGs targets and indicators. 
\0xEF Coordination mechanism by the Ministry of Macroeconomic Planning and Investment Promotion under the guidance and supervision of OPC for SDG implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4. Means of Implementation 
 
A major impediment to implementing the Agenda 2030 in Zimbabwe is the limited fiscal space. Recurrent expenditures continue to exceed revenues leaving public development finance to be met by borrowings. Donor funding, amounting to $800 million provides a window to implement some development priorities. Implementation of the Agenda 2030 requires the mobilisation of substantial financial resources.  There is considerable scope for enhancing fiscal space in Zimbabwe and thereby strengthening domestic resource mobilisation for sustainable development. This can be achieved by: 
 
\0xEF Taxation reforms by migrating beyond broad-based taxes to alternative revenue sources (e.g. corrective taxes) and strengthening tax compliance and administration. 
\0xEF Reprioritizing expenditures (by shifting resources from less to more efficient uses, making ongoing spending programmes more efficient, and cutting or phasing out inefficient programmes). 
\0xEF Plugging loopholes to eliminate leakages. 
\0xEF Restructuring state owned enterprises.  
\0xEF Leveraging remittances from the diaspora. 
\0xEF Harnessing private sector participation in infrastructure investment through Public Private Partnerships (PPPs). However, PPPs need to be properly evaluated, structured, and regulated.  
\0xEF Incentivising domestic savings. 
 
Another major difficulty in terms of the implementation process of SDGs involves the unavailability of reliable timely and disaggregated data which is vital for monitoring, reviewing and reporting of SDGs. There is a need to improve collection, analysis and dissemination of high quality, reliable and timely data disaggregated by sex, ethnicity, disability, region and other relevant variables. ZIMSTAT plays an active role at the national level, and participates in the process of developing indicators for the SDG targets and would require technical assistance to strengthen its capacity in terms of incorporating the SDGs targets/indicators into the national statistical system. There is also a need to strengthen regional and global cooperation in terms of enhancing statistical capacity for effective monitoring and evaluation of SDGs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. Next Steps 
 
The following need to be undertaken. 
 
\0xEF Strengthening the National Budget policy to achieve SDGs. 
		? Dialogue and follow-up action on financing for development in Zimbabwe. 
\0xEF Aligning sub-national strategies and policies to achieve SDGs. 
\0xEF Capacity building support targeting civil society to enhance their participation in the implementation of SDGs. 
\0xEF Strengthen stakeholder participation in implementation and monitoring at national, provincial and local levels. 
\0xEF Enhance the capacity of the statistical agency to effectively address the data demands of the 2030 Agenda. 
\0xEF Expand climate smart agriculture, improve agricultural extension services and rural infrastructure. 
\0xEF Greater private sector involvement: Realizing the SDGs calls for greater private sector involvement as a key development partner. Private Sector involvement is particularly important to bridge the huge financing gap that exists. The country can use the OECD Guidelines for multinational enterprises as a basis for providing a strong framework for corporate accountability supporting the aims of the SDGs.  
\0xEF The active involvement of local authorities and the especially communities will help to create a critical mass around sustainable development and thereby creating an auspicious environment for their achievement. 
\0xEF Improve public awareness, knowledge and perceptions of SDGs. Findings from the UReport poll that was conducted on 30 November 2016 by UNICEF to gauge among others awareness and knowledge of the SDGs show that the majority of the respondents (72 per cent) said they were not aware of SDGs. 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
The Country has demonstrated a strong commitment to the agenda 2030 as evidenced by the strong policy, legal and institutional framework that it has put in place for the attainment of sustainable development. In spite of the notable progress that the country has registered the country is however, facing several challenges in terms of implementing the SDGs. These include: 
 
\0xEF Limited fiscal space with the bulk of fiscal revenues going towards funding recurrent expenditures. This is exacerbated by the high indebtedness. 
\0xEF The increase in the urban population coupled with rising informaity which has led to several challenges including: rising incidence of urban poverty; inadequate housing; inadequate provision of services; and environmental degradation and pollution.  
\0xEF Secondary school enrolment and access to healthcare have been negatively affected by the relatively low per capita incomes.  
\0xEF There are gaps in terms of policy implementation and coherence.  
\0xEF Insufficient timely and disaggregated data for most indicators makes it difficult to track and monitor progress. 
 
The country has also learnt a number of useful lessons as it implements SDGs. These lessons can assist other countries as they implement SDGs and include the following: 
 
\0xEF Prioritization is key: Zimbabwe has committed itself to implementing all the SDGs with emphasis on the following 10 SDGs (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13 and 17). The prioritisation exercise was guided by the countryis vision, the need to focus on enabling Goals, resource availability and our unfinished business in the MDGis.  
\0xEF Integration and alignment essential for effective implementation: The SDGs have already been mainstreamed and integrated into the national development plan. SDGs implementation and national priorities will continue to be aligned. Plans are underway to strengthen capacities of sub-national authorities to align strategies and policies at that level to achieve SDGs. 
\0xEF Parliament play a vital role in domestication and ownership: extensive consultations with Parliamentarians led to the establishment of a Parliamentary Thematic Committee on SDGs represented by all Chairs of portfolio committees. Such processes will enable actions towards enabling legislations, appropriation, oversight and monitoring of the SDGs. 
\0xEF Targeted specific interventions can pay hefty dividends:  Recent initiative on special programme on maize production for import substitution (command agriculture) including targeted input subsidy provision has strengthened resistance against economic and climate-induced shocks. 
\0xEF Strong partnerships are essential to progress on SDGs: In view of comprehensive nature of SDGs, strong partnerships play a vital role in SDG implementation.  
 
 
There are also a number of opportunities that the countries can leverage which include: 
 
\0xEF Innovative mobilisation of domestic resources will be crucial to build financial capacity and create fiscal space for sustainable development. There is scope for fiscal expansion in plugging leakages through illicit financial outflows to the tune of US$1.8 billion annually.  
\0xEF The huge informal economy also presents significant opportunities for government to increase the fiscal space if appropriate policies are put in place to harness its full potential.  
\0xEF Leverage the youth demographic dividend through skills development among others. 
\0xEF Harness ICTs for sustainable development by building on current initiatives such as the STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics). 
 
 
7. Statistical Annex 
 


2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
Maize 
Production (mt) 
1,242,566 
1,327,572 
1,451,629 
968,041 
798,596 
1,456,153 
742,225 
511,816 

Area (Ha) 
1,521,780 
1,803,542 
2,096,034 
1,689,786 
1,265,236 
1,655,366 
1,531,663 
1,161,997 

Yield (t/ha) 
0.8 
0.7 
0.7 
1.0 
0.6 
0.9 
0.5 
0.4 
Wheat 
Production (mt) 
47,910 
41,506 
53,073 
33,655 
40,950 
58,738 
62,261 
61,715 

Area (Ha) 
20,634 
14,195 
15,982 
9,727 
9,100 
14,648 
14,789 
14,220 

Yield (t/ha) 
2.3 
2.9 
3.3 
3.5 
4.5 
4.0 
4.2 
4.3 
Sorghum 
Production (mt) 
181,963 
131,644 
9,478 
64,793 
69,245 
136,544 
39,746 
36,305 

Area (Ha) 
389,334 
386,585 
304,693 
279,239 
260,115 
280,210 
202,653 
190,398 

Yield (t/ha) 
0.5 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.3 
0.5 
0.2 
0.2 
Soya beans 
Production (mt) 
85,227 
48,010 
60,124 
51,869 
76,933 
84,661 
57,850 
47,755 

Area (Ha) 
115,817 
70,256 
84,173 
70,542 
59,179 
67,507 
36,316 
39,985 

Yield (kg/ha) 
1.4 
1.5 
1.4 
1.4 
1.3 
1.3 
1.2 
1.2 
Groundnuts 
Production (mt) 
216,619 
186,214 
230,475 
120,001 
86,747 
135,138 
91,398 
47,209 

Area (Ha) 
354,636 
424,532 
426,806 
335,586 
268,869 
261,776 
240,904 
185,849 

Yield (kg/ha) 
0.6 
0.4 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.5 
0.3 
0.3 
Sunflower 
Production (mt) 
39,018 
13,960 
11,508 
6,902 



3,258.90 

Area (Ha) 
79,212 
38,102 
31,102 
17,953 
12,359 
11,101 
5,672 
8,428.10 

Yield (kg/ha) 
0.5 
0.4 
0.4 
0.4 
- 
- 
- 
0.4 
Table 2: Selected Crop Production, 2009-2016 
FIGURE 2: SELECTED CROP PRODUCTION (IN '000' TONNES) 
































	 Maize	 Wheat	 Soya beans	 Sorghum	 Sunflower	 Groundnuts
	2009 	2010 	2011 	2012 	2013 	2014 	2015 	2016 	2017 
 
Table 3: Trends in Public Health Expenditure, 2010-2017 

2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
2016 
2017 
Public Health Expenditure 
(% of Total Government 
Expenditure) 
7.5 
7.6 
9.7 
9.6 
8.5 
6.6 
7.5 
5.6 
Public Health Expenditure (% of GDP) 
1.7 
2.1 
2.8 
2.8 
2.5 
2.1 
2.3 
1.9 

 
Table 4: Life Expectancy at Birth  
Year 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Both sexes 
50 
52.4 
54.9 
56.6 
58 
59.2 
60.7 
Male 
49.2 
51.4 
53.5 
55.2 
56.4 
57.5 
59 
Female 
50.8 
53.5 
56.3 
58.1 
59.6 
60.9 
62.3 
Table 5: Healthy Life Expectancy at Birth 

Both sexes 
Male 

Female 


2015 
2000 
2015 
2000 
2015 
2000 
Zimbabwe 
52.1 
39.2 
50.9 
39.2 
53.4 
39.3 
Zambia 
53.7 
38.3 
51.6 
36.8 
55.9 
39.7 
Mozambique 
49.6 
42.3 
48.3 
41.2 
50.8 
43.4 
South Africa 
54.4 
50 
51.9 
48 
56.8 
52 

Table 6: Adult Mortality (probability of dying between 15 and 60 years per 1,000 population) 
Year 
2009 
2010 
2011 
2012 
2013 
2014 
2015 
Both sexes 
587 
527 
464 
429 
399 
371 
336 
Male 
598 
542 
486 
453 
426 
398 
359 
Female 
578 
513 
443 
407 
373 
345 
313 
